1. FOREWORD
Government College of Engineering, Chhtrapati Sambhjinagar(Aurangabad) is an Autonomous
institute of Government of Maharashtra. The institute is established in 1960 to meet the growing
demand for technical human resource in the country. The institute offers Under graduate, Post
graduate and Doctoral programmes in engineering The institute initially started with Civil,
Mechanical and Electrical Electronics and Power Engineering with 60 students as intake capacity
leading to the Bachelors Degree in Engineering Subsequently additional programmes such as
Electronics and Telecommunication, Computer Science and Engineering in 1999 and
Information Technology in 2000 have been added. Post graduate programmes leading to Masters
Degree in various branches of engineering have been introduced in 1986. This institute has been
awarded autonomy from academic year 2006-07, vide Govt. Resolution number
2004/1341/04)/(02)/TS-6 order Dated 29.03.2006 and is affiliated to Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar
Marathwada University. Chhtrapati Sambhjinagar(Aurangabad). The University, State
Government and the University Grants Commission have conferred autonomous status to all the
under graduate, Post graduate and Five doctoral courses of this institute initially from 2006-07
for five years and later renewed and extended in 2012 upto 2017-18 again it is renewed and
extended up to 2025. Institute is accreditated and shall apply for renewal of few UG and PG
Courses. Some of the courses are re-accreditated. All the academic matters of the institute are
governed through the Ordinances framed by the Academic Council and approved by the Board
of Management. The implementation of these ordinances is to be made through the detailed
regulations framed by the Academic Council.
2. Preamble
The aim of the undergraduate programme is to impart fundamental knowledge while the post
graduate programmes enrich the students further in a specialized course.
The curriculum has academic, co-curricular and extracurricular components designed for the
integrated development of the students possessing expertise, ethical values and morality.
3
The syllabus in general include academic courses involving classroom teaching, teacher's
assessment, laboratory practical, training, seminars, projects, field visit, dissertation etc.
After completing the curriculum, the student will acquire adequate knowledge base in the desired
branch, which could be easily employed for the solution of real life problems and develop further
through higher education, for reaching the frontiers of technology.
A. Ordinances for the Academic Evaluation of UG Programs
1. Short title and Commencement
2.1 "Institute” shall mean Government College of Engineering, Chhatrapati Sambhaji Nagar
2.2 "AC" shall mean the Academic Council of the Institute.
2.3 "EC" shall mean the Examination Committee
2.4 "BOS" shall mean the Board of Studies.
2.5 "ESC" shall mean Examination Sub-Committee
2.6 "CoE shall mean the Controller of Examinations
2.7 "DCOE" shall mean Departmental Controller of Examinations
2.8 "IGMC shall mean Institute Grade Moderation Committee, the committee appointed by the
Chairman to moderate grades awarded by the course coordinators.
2.9 “DGMC” shall mean Departmental Grade Moderation Committee, the committee appointed
by the department to moderate grades awarded by the course coordinators.
2.10 "ISC" shall mean Institute Standing Committee
2.11 "Student" shall mean a student registered for an Undergraduate /Post Graduate / Doctoral
programme for Full time / Part time study leading to Bachelors / Masters/ Ph.D. degree.
2.12 "Direct Admission Student” shall mean a student who is admitted directly to second year of
the degree program after completion of the Diploma Course and registered for undergraduate
programme for full time study leading to Bachelors degree.
2.13 "Course Coordinator” shall mean a faculty member who teaches and sets question paper for
a course
4
2.14 “Examination Period" shall mean the period of examination planned by the office of
Controller of Examination at the end of each semester and as specified in academic calendar of
the institute.
2.15 "End Semester Examination" (ESE) shall mean the examination conducted at the end of
each semester.
 2.16 "Re-Examination” shall mean the examination conducted after the ESE of each semester
for candidate who fail in the ESE.
2.17 "Unfair means" means an act or attempted act of deceit to gain academic credit and includes
the use of, or the preparation of, for the purposes of using, unauthorized material in an
examination whether inscribed in a paper, clothing, the candidates person etc, instruments
(including electronic instrument), the reception of materials, signs or signals from other persons,
substitution of other person for the candidate.
2.18 "Invigilator" shall mean the person who conducts and supervises the examination in the hall
as per the rules.
2.19 “COE Office” means the office of the Controller of Examinations at the Institute.
2.20 "SGPA" shall mean the Semester Grade Point Average.
2.21 "CGPA" shall mean the Cumulative Grade Point Average.
2.22 "UG" shall mean Undergraduate
2.24 "PG" shall mean Post Graduate
2.25"Internal Examiner” shall mean an examiner who is faculty in the institute and deals with the
course.
2.25 "External Examiner” shall mean an examiner from outside the institute and is appointed as
an examiner for the course on recommendation of BOS of respective department.
2.26 "Course Evaluator" means a person entrusted with the evaluation of performance of
students in a course.
2.27 “Paper Setter" means a person who is appointed for preparation of question paper for a
course.
2.28 "Internal Vigilance Squad" shall mean a group of at least three faculty members of suitable
number from the institute appointed by the Head of the institute to keep vigilance during
examination and to find out cases of unfair means if any.
5
2.29 "External Vigilance Squad" means a group at least 03 members of suitable number from
outside the institute appointed by the Head of the Institute to keep vigilance during examinations
and to find out cases of unfair means, if any.
3. Ordinances
3.1 The CoE shall function in co-ordination with Dean Academic and Registrar (Academic),
Government College of Engineering Chhtrapati Sambhjinagar(Aurangabad)
3.2 The CoE shall function as per the rules and regulations approved by the Examination
Committee and the Academic Council.
3.3 The right to amend the rules and regulations related to functioning of CoE lies with
Examination Committee and the Academic Council.
3.4 The Head of respective department shall appoint DCoE, DGMC and co-ordinator of
examination etc. in consultation with the Head of the institute.
3.5 The CoE office shall co-ordinate the evaluation process by following the examination rules.
B. REGULATIONS FOR ACADEMIC EVALUATION OF UG, PG and MCA
PROGRAM
1. General
1.1 These regulations shall be called the regulations for the Evaluation UG/PG programmes of
the Institute.
1.2 These regulations shall come into force on such date as decided by the Examination
Committee and the Academic Council.
2. Academic program
 2.1 The Institute shall offer Undergraduate programmes leading to Bachelor’s Degree in
Technology (B.Tech.).
2.1 The Institute shall offer Postgraduate programmes leading to Master’s Degree in Technology
(M.Tech.) and Masters of Computer Application (MCA)
6
3. Semester System
3.1 The academic programmes in the Institute shall be based on semester system: There shall be
two semesters in a year, namely, First (Preferably July to November) and second (Preferably
January to April).
3.2 Each course shall have a certain number of credits assigned to it depending upon the
academic load of the course, which would be assessed on the basis of performance of theory
lectures, tutorials, laboratory practical’s, seminars, project, field study, dissertation, thesis etc. as
applicable.
3.3 The courses offered in a semester shall be continually assessed and evaluated to judge the
student’s in each semester.
4. Registration Numbers
4.1 The registration numbers allotted to each student shall be in the form of 11 digit code
consisting of alphabets and numerals as described below, (eg.BT23F01F001 for UG and
MT23F07F001 for PG and MC23F14F001 for MCA)
First 2 Characters Academic Programme
BT
MT
MC
DR
Undergraduate
Post Graduate
Master of Computer Applications
Phd.
3rd and 4th Numeral Year of Admission(eg. 23 for admissions in 2023)
Fifth Character Type of Admission at the Entry Level
F Candidate joining the course from first year
S Candidate admitted through lateral entry, Direct second
year
6
th and 7th Numeral Programme Code
01 Civil Engineering
02 Mechanical Engineering
03 Electrical Engineering
04 Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering
7
05 Computer Science and Engineering
06 Information Technology
07 M. Tech (Geotechnical Engineering)
08 M. Tech (Water Resources Engineering)
09 M. Tech (Structural Engineering)
10 M. Tech (Mechanical Design)
11 M. Tech (Production Engineering)
12 M. Tech (Electrical Power System)
13 M. Tech (Electronics)
14 MCA
15 M. Tech (Electrical Machine Drives)
8th Numeral
F
P
Types of Courses
Full Time Course
Part Time Course
9th to 11th Numeral Number assigned to candidate
5. Course Credits
5.1 Each course shall have an integer number of credits, which reflect its weightage. The course
credits are decided by respective BOS and approved by AC. The number of credits of a course in
a semester shall ordinarily be as under,
5.2 Lectures: One lecture / tutorial hour per week shall be assigned one credit.
5.3 Practical: Two laboratory hours per week shall be assigned One credit.
5.4 Other courses like project, Industrial training, Seminar, Environmental studies etc. in the
programme shall be assigned such number of credits as may be approved by the Academic
Council.
8
Rules and Regulations for the Examination
6. Examination Committee (EC):
6.1 Members
As per the statute with reference to Maharashtra University Act 2016, the autonomous college
shall constitute the Examination Committee, which shall consist of following members,
6.1.1 The Director/Principal / Head of the Institute as Chairman of the committee.
 6.1.2 Three teachers with not less than 10 years teaching experience nominated by the Head of
the institute by rotation as member.
6.1.3 Controller of Examination of the affiliating university or his nominee not below the rank of
Deputy Registrar as member.
6.1.4 One evaluation expert nominated by the Principal/Head of the institute.
6.1.5 Controller of examinations of the autonomous institute shall act as member secretary.
6.2 Powers and Duties of the Examination Committee:
The Examination committee shall,
6.2.1 Ensure proper organization, conduct of the examinations, evaluation, re-assessment and
declaration of result.
6.2.2 Appoint Paper setters, Examiners, etc. from amongst the persons included in the panel of
examiners prepared by the respective BOS.
6.2.3 Ensure preparation of the time schedule of examinations and dates of declaration of results
for every examination
6.2.4 Constitute a sub committee to investigate and take disciplinary action for unfair means and
lapses on the part of candidates and the persons involved in the conduct of examination.
6.2.5 Arrange for strict vigilance during the conduct of examinations, so as to avoid use of unfair
means by the student, teachers or any other person involved in the system.
6.2.6 Undertake, exercise and experiment in examination reforms.
6.2.7 Perform such other duties and responsibilities, which are assigned to it from time to time.
6.2.8 Meet at least twice in a year or as may be required from time to time.
9
6.2.9 Two third members shall constitute a quorum. If the meeting is adjourned for the want of
quorum, then no quorum shall be required for such a meeting
7. Examination Sub Committee (ESC)
It shall be the subcommittee constituted by the Chairman, Examination Committee for
the issues relating to unfair means related to examinations.
7.1 The subcommittee shall consist of three members of whom one shall be its Chairman and
other two members shall be amongst the Heads of various departments/senior faculty of the
institute.
7.2 The Examination Sub Committee shall investigate and recommend disciplinary action
against students, paper setters, evaluators, Internal/ External Examiners, all officers and the staff
involved in the examination system in any capacity, involved in unfair means and lapses, if any.
7.3 Recommendation of the subcommittee shall be placed before the Chairman, examination
committee, which shall take the disciplinary action in the matter, as it deems fit.
8. Office of the Controller of Examinations
8.1 To ensure proper functioning of the CoE office, Principal / Head of the Institute shall have
discretionary powers to appoint from amongst the faculty members of the institute as Controller
of Examination, Joint Controller of Examination, Assistant Controller of examination and other
supporting staff.
8.2 The number of persons working at the CoE office may be decided or decreased as per the
requirements.
8.3 Examination related expenditure, of any sort, shall be paid through the Joint account of the
Chairman, Examination Committee and the Controller of Examinations
8.4 Appropriate amount may be invested in bank as fixed deposit from time to time
8.5 Internal audit by Chartered Accountant appointed by the institute shall be done every year
10
9. Controller of Examinations (CoE):
The CoE of the institute with JCoE, ACOEs and supporting staff working in his office shall,
9.1 Prepare schedule for various examinations like End Semester Examination, Re-Examination,
Practical, Oral, Viva Voce, etc. in co-ordination with the Dean Academics.
9.2 Prepare detail time table for ESE and Re-ESE as per the schedule
9.3 Obtain three sets of question papers to be used for ESE and Re-Examination, in sealed cover
in respective courses (FY,SY and TY).
9.4 Obtain three sets of question papers to be used for ESE and Re-Examination in sealed cover
from internal paper setters and two sets from paper setters outside the institute for B Tech Final
Year, M. Tech, MCA and PhD courses.
9.5 Select randomly one question paper and make required number of copies at the examination
section and seal.
9.6 Keep all question paper sets, answer books, attendance sheets, etc. ready for distribution to
the Examination Co-ordinators of the various departments.
9.7 Distribute all the requisite material to the Examination Coordinators of each department for
the smooth conduction of ESE and Re-ESE.
9.8 Receive course code wise answer sheets along with attendance from the Examination cocoordinators immediately after every session of examination.
9.9 Issue the answer books to the course evaluators for assessment
9.10 Receive all mark sheets/grades of all the classes for all the courses in the department duly
signed by DGMC from respective DCOE
9.11 Ensure proper entry of marks in the software of CoE cell and maintain the records of all the
marks and grades.
9.12 Display results in the form of grades on the institute Website /notice boards,
9.13 Ensure proper printing and distribution of the grade cards to the students.
9.14 Submit result to the Dean (Academic) for further analysis.
9.15 Prepare proposals for reforms in examination system, examination fees and remuneration to
the staff related with the examination activities.
11
9.16 Carry out any other activity related with the examination or evaluation other than the above
as per the directives from the Examination Committee.
10. Joint Controller of Examinations (JCoE):
The JCOE shall,
10.1 Shall work as CoE, in the absence of CoE.
10.2 Discuss issues related with overall functioning of CoE office with CoE/ ACOE/ and other
staff.
10.3 Act as per the directions of the COE / EC.
11. Assistant Controller of Examination (ACOE):
The ACOE shall,
11.1 Discuss issues related with overall functioning of CoE office with COE/ JCOE/ and other
staff.
11.2 Act as per the directions from the COE / JCOE/EC.
12. Other staff at CoE Cell
Act as per the directions from CoE /JCOE / ACOE / EC.
13. Departmental Controller of Examination (DCoE)
The DCOE of each department shall be appointed by the Principal in consultation with the
respective HOD.
DCOE shall,
13.1 Prepare ISE-I ISE-II and Practical/oral examination time table for department and coordinate the conduct of examinations in the department such as ISE-I, ISE-II, Practical, Oral,
12
Seminar, Project, Dissertation etc as applicable for UG and PG students of the respective
departments.
13.2 Collect the examination stationery (Answer books, attendance sheets) from the examination
cell and distribute it to the concerned course co-ordinators.
13.3 Collect back the unused answer books from the course coordinators and return it to the
Examination cell.
13.4 Collect the mark sheets of ISE, Practical, Oral, Seminar, Assignment, Term Work etc. from
respective course coordinators/subject teachers and submit to examination cell in specified time
period. Mark sheets of Assignment and Term work shall be duly signed by the Chairman.
DGMC
13.5 Verify the marks entry and grades of End Semester Examination and Re-Examination.
13.6 Discuss issues related to various examinations of all the programmes in the respective
department and discuss the same with COE/JCOE / ACOE.
14. Institute Standing Committee (ISC)
14.1 The head of the institute / Principal shall appoint an institute standing committee to deal
with extra ordinary situations, unusual events and unresolved issues.
14.2 The ISC shall consist of all HoD's as members and one of them shall be its Chairman.
15. Grade Moderation
15.1 Institute Grade Moderation Committee (IGMC):
15.1.1 Chairman Examination committee shall appoint the members from amongst the faculty of
the institute. The committee shall have chairman and two members appointed by examination
committee.
15.1.2 CoE cell shall prepare ESE and Re-examination result and conduct a meeting with IGMC
15.1.3 The role of IGMC shall be overall monitoring of academic evaluation at institute level.
15.2 Departmental Grade Moderation committee (DGMC):
15.2.1 The DGMC shall consist of one chairman and two members appointed by HOD from
amongst the faculty of the department.
13
15.2.2 The role of DGMC shall be overall monitoring of academic evaluation at department
level.
16. Departmental Academic Appeals Board (DAAB):
Constitution:
a. Program Coordinator of the teaching/parent Dep. Chairman ---Chairman
b. Three faculty members -------------Member
c. One faculty from outside the Department
 nominated by Principal --------------Member
d. Faculty Advisor(s) of the Class from where
 the Appeal ----------------Member
Note:
There shall be one DAAB for every department.
The Chairman may co-opt and/ or invite more members.
Depending on the prevailing circumstances, a Senior faculty of the Department,
nominated by the Principal, shall act as Chair person instead of Head of the
Department.
If the concerned Co-ordinator is a member of DAAB then he/ she shall keep
himself out of the Board during deliberations.
Functions:
1. To receive grievance/ complaints in writing from the students regarding anomaly in
award of grades due to bias, victimization, erratic evaluation, etc. and redress the
complaints.
n. To interact with the concerned course Co-ordinator and the student separately before
taking the decision.
m. The decision of the DAAB will be based on simple majority.
1v. The recommendations of the DAAB shall be communicated to the Dean
(Academic) and Principal for further appropriate action if required.
14
17. Vigilance Squad
17.1 External Vigilance Squad (EVS):
16.1.1 The external vigilance squad at least three members from amongst the senior teaching
faculty of any other institute of whom one shall be lady, One of the members of the committee
shall work as the Chairman. The committee shall be constituted by chairman examination
committee.
17.1.2 The EVS shall give surprise visits on at least three days during the examination period and
the chairman shall submit a report to Chairman, Examination committee with suggestions,
modifications if necessary for proper conduct of examination.
17.1.3 The committee shall be authorized to detect the use of unfair means and unfair means in
the examination.
17.1.5 It is empowered to enter in any examination block, hall for checking the candidate's
identity for ascertaining authenticity of the candidate.
17.1.6 Observe whether the invigilators and staff appointed for conduct of examinations are
following the instructions scrupulously.
17.1.7 Check the students trying to resort to unfair means at the time of examinations and report
such cases to the Controller of Examination in writing.
17.1.8 All extraordinary developments related to the conduct of examination shall be referred to
the Chairman Examination Committee, who would decide appropriate course of action using his
discretionary powers
17.2 Internal Vigilance Squad (IVS) :
17.2.1 The internal vigilance squad of at least three members of whom one shall be lady, shall be
appointed by Chairman, Examination Committee. The IVs is authorized to visit to examination
hall/s on any/all days of examination during the examination period.
17.2.2 It is fully authorized to detect use of unfair means in the examination.
17.2.3 It can enter in any examination block for checking the candidate's identity for ascertaining
authenticity of the candidate.
17.2.4 It can observe whether the invigilators and staff appointed for conduct of examinations are
following the instructions scrupulously.
15
17.2.5 It can check students using unfair means at the time of examinations and report such cases
to the Controller of Examination in writing.
16.2.6 It shall refer all extraordinary developments related to the conduct of examination to the
Chairman Examination Committee, who would decide appropriate course of action using his
discretionary powers.
18. Examination Co-ordinators
18.1 There shall be Co-ordinator of examination for each department for the smooth conduct of
ESE and Re-ESE
18.2 The Co-ordinator of the Examination shall be the in-charge of End semester examination
and Re Examination to be held at the end of every semester.
19. Course Co-ordinator
Course co-ordinator dealing with a course shall,
 19.1 Prepare a set of three question papers and submit it to the examination section in sealed
envelope.
19.2 Assess all the answer books of the course, submit the marks lists of ISE-I, ISE-II, ISE-III,
(teacher's assessment, term work) etc through DCOE and the mark lists of ESE and Reexamination to the examination section directly.
16
C. REGULATIONS REAGRDING CONDUCT OF EXAMINATIONS
1. Conduct of ISEs (Class Test)
1.1.The First year coordinator shall prepare the time table for the first year ISEs and inform the
same to all the departments.
1.2. For all other classes (UG/PG, Full time/Part time) the respective departments DCoE shall
prepare the time table of ISE-I, ISE-II, display it on the notice board and submit a copy to the
CoE office.
1.3 The DCoE of the department offering the course, shall collect required stationary including
blank answer books from the COE office before the commencement of the examinations.
1.4 In case of departments where DCoE is not appointed the course coordinator shall collect the
required stationary.
 1.5 The course coordinator shall prepare the question paper for the ISE and get required number
of photocopies from the examination section or from the department and use it on the day of
examination
1.6 The seating arrangement of the ISE shall be prepared by the DCOE
 1.7 The course coordinator shall remain present during the test along with the question paper,
answer books, attendance sheets.
1.8 The course coordinator/ invigilator shall hand over the attendance sheet and the unused
answer books to the DCOE/ Coordinator.
1.9 The used answer books shall be retained by the course coordinator for evaluation
1.10 The course coordinator shall display the ISE marks obtained by each student on the
department notice board and submit a copy in the prescribed format to the CoE office through
DCOE.
17
2. Conduct of Practical Examination by Internal and External Examiners
2.1. For the courses where practical examination is conducted the internal and external
examiners are appointed by the examination committee from the list of examiners recommended
by the Board of Studies.
2.2 All the candidates are evaluated by the internal and external examiner for Practical/ oral/ viva
voce within the premises of the institution as per the schedule prepared and displayed by the
department.
2.3. Examiners shall take attendance of the students present for the examination and shall enter
marks by internal/ external examiner in the MIS software, saved and locked. The examiners shall
submit the attendance and mark sheet to the examination section through the DCoE in sealed
envelope.
2.4 The DCoE shall collect all such mark sheet envelope and submit them along with the list of
envelopes to the examination section within two days after the last day of practical / oral/ viva
voce examination of the department.
3. Conduction of End Semester Examination / Re-Examination
3.1. The End Semester Examination would be held for the courses offered in that semester.
3.2. The Re-Examination would be held after every End Semester Examination of a semester, for
the courses offered in that semester only.
3.3. The Co-ordinator of the Examination shall conduct End Semester Examination
3.4 End Semester Examination and Re-Examination shall be conducted by CoE Cell.
3.3.1. Pre-Examination Activities
The Co-ordinator shall
3.3.1.1. Collect the blank answer books and required stationary from the examination section one
day before start of examination.
3.3.1.2. Collect the Question paper from the examination section before the start of examination.
18
 3.3.1.3. Collect List of students appearing for the Examination five days before the start of
examination.
3.3.1.4. Prepare invigilation schedule for the examination as per the requirement and
communicate to the invigilators (One block of maximum 40 students). There shall be one
invigilator for each block. Invigilator shall be a teaching faculty member only.
3.3.1.5. Prepare block wise Seating arrangement for the examination and display it for the
information of students and submit a copy to the examination section.
3.3.1.6. Prepare Attendance sheets for the examination (Separate sheet for Regular and Back log
subjects)
3.3.1.7. Appoint One Class III staff, if required, for clerical work.
3.3.1.8 Assign duties for the Class IV such as opening and closing the examination block,
providing water and other examination related work. There shall be one class IV for 02 blocks.
3.3.2 Activities on the Day of Examination
3.3.2.1. Open the Examination halls 15 minutes before the commencement of examination
3.3.2.2. Open the sealed Question papers packets 10 minutes before commencement of
examination in the presence of two examinees.
3.3.2.3. Prepare a set of 5 Question Papers each for the use of Examination Section and hand
over the same along with the Answer books of that course. After the last day of examination, of
soft copy of used question papers shall be displayed on the website of the institute.
3.3.2.4. Assign duties to the invigilators and hand over the required number of answer books
with attendance sheet.
3.3.2.5 Shall solve the problems / queries of students and report complaints about question
papers if any.
3.3.2.6. Supervise the smooth conduct of Examination.
3.3.2.7. Forward the cases of unfair means to Examination Section in sealed envelope.
3.3.2.8. Collect the Answer books from the invigilator and hand over the same to Examination
Section on the same day.
19
3.3.3. Activities after the Examination
 3.3.3.1. Hand over the unused Answer Books and Question papers to the Examination Section.
3.3.3.2. Submit a copy of the block wise seating arrangement to the Examination Section
3.3.3.3. Prepare the remuneration bill for the staff appointed for conduct of examination
(Invigilator, Class III, Class IV staff, Co-ordinator etc.)
4. Examination Rules
4.1. Confirmation of Enrollment: A candidates name shall not appear in the list of candidate
appearing for the examination unless he/she completes all the requirements of enrollment
(including admission, registration examination form and fee by due date etc.).
4.2. Schedule of Examinations: By mid-semester, the Dean (academic) shall provide to COE a
schedule of courses for which examination is to be conducted and a result is to be declared.
4.3 List of Candidate: The complete list of registered eligible candidates for examination shall
be downloaded from the MIS.
4.4 Time-Table: A tentative Time Table for examinations to be held shall be displayed on the
appropriate Notice Boards/Institute website. A candidate, who finds overlaps in timetable, should
notify the same to COE Cell. A final timetable for examinations held shall be displayed two
weeks before the commencement of examinations.
4.5 Special Arrangements: A candidate who, on account of physical disability, is unable to
appear for an examination at the place allocated, or has special needs such as amanuensis to
write on his/her behalf, may apply to the COE for special arrangements to be made. An
application on pre-existing disability shall be submitted for prior permission from designated
authorities, at least seven working days prior to the date of examinations.
20
4.6 If a student is unable to write the examination on medical grounds, he/she is allowed to take a
writer with prior permission of the Principal/Head of the Institute subjected to following
requirements.
4.6.1. Medical certificate of the student duly attested by the Civil Surgeon /Government Medical
Officer.
 4.6.2. Bonafide certificate of the writer and photo identity card.
4.6.3. The eligibility condition for the writer is, he should be younger than the candidate at least
by one year and should have qualification less than the candidate and should not have appeared
or appearing for that particular course. Writer should be from non-engineering courses.
4.6.4. Extra time will not be given for completion of paper.
4.6.5. Only one writer will be allowed during the entire examination
4.6.6. Writer is not allowed for papers where skills are examined (e.g. Drawing, practicals etc)
4.7. Entry to Examination Room: A candidate shall not enter the examination room unless the
Invigilator gives permission, and in any event, not later than the first thirty minutes of an
examination session
 4.8. Leaving Examination Room: A candidate appearing for the examination can leave the
examination hall after submitting his answer book any time after 60 minutes from the start of
examination. However his question paper shall be retained by the invigilator till the end of the
examination.
4.9. Behavior: A candidate, admitted to the examination room shall comply with all
requirements and directions of the Invigilator/officers related with conduct of examination.
4.10. Places: On entering in examination room, a candidate shall occupy, without delay such
place as indicated by signs or by an Invigilator and shall not change place except with the
permission of the Invigilator.
4.11. Identification: A candidate shall bring to examination room his/he Student Identification
Card.
4.12. Unauthorized Materials: A candidate shall not, except with the explicit permission of the
examiner as indicated in the examination bring into the examination room anything, whatsoever,
which conveys or is capable of conveying information concerning any course/unit, or which in
the opinion of the Invigilator, gives rise to suspicion that it is capable of doing so.
21
4.13. Communication within the Examination Room: A candidate having entered the
examination room, shall not communicate, by word writing, signaling, with any person other
than an Invigilator or as Examiner, or assist any other person to communicate with another
candidate, or willingly receive communication from any person other than Invigilator or
Examiner.
4.14. Compliance with Instructions: A candidate shall comply with all instructions set forth on
the Answer book and / or the Question Paper, or with any examination notice displayed in the
examination room, or with any instruction given by an Invigilator.
4.15. Misconduct: A candidate shall not use unfair means or attempt to do unfair means during
an examination or undertake any other activity which may be considered as an act of misconduct.
A person, whether candidate or not, shall not do anything intended to assist a candidate
appearing for an examination to carry unfair means or otherwise defeat the purpose of the
examination.
 4.16. Removal of Papers: A candidate shall not take any Question Paper, Answer book or any
other material, which is property of the Institute given to him by Invigilator.
5. Powers of the Invigilator:
An Invigilator, while performing examination duty shall have following powers,
5.1. Confiscate any material brought into the examination room, which the Invigilator considers
to be unauthorized; the confiscated material, with a statement of the circumstances, shall be
submitted to the COE Cell with appropriate note.
5.2. Collect mobile handset, digital watches, other allied gadgets found in possession of any
student; he/she shall submit the same subsequently to the COE Cell with appropriate note.
5.3. Ask any question related to the person's behavior in the examination room.
5.4. Instruct any person, whether a candidate or not, to leave the examination room if in the
opinion of the Invigilator, the person's behavior is such as to disturb or distract any other
candidate.
22
5.5. Such other powers are necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of examination. Any
person present in an examination room shall comply with any such requirements of an invigilator
and answer any questions asked.
 5.6. Refer such cases to Examination Sub Committee (ESC) which will decide the appropriate
action.
6. Examination Rules for Candidates
6.1. Each candidate should remain present in the Examination Block well before the time when
the examination is due to start.
6.2. Candidates are expected to bring their own writing instruments along with nonprogrammable calculator, if required. They shall not bring into the Examination Block any book,
paper or programmable calculator, unless the official notice of the examination states to do so.
6.3. Mobile phones, digital watches other allied gadgets are not permitted in Examination Block.
Any candidate who is found to have a mobile telephone, on or off, in his/her possession after the
start of the examination, shall be considered as committing an unfair means.
6.4. Overcoats and other surplus clothing must not be brought into the Examination Block.
6.5. Transparent drinking water bottle up to 1 liter capacity is allowed. Under no circumstances
any food or alternative drink can be brought into the Examination Block, expect with unless prior
permission, for medical reasons, has been obtained.
6.6. Complete silence must be maintained in the examination room at all times. The use of any
type of alarm clock is prohibited.
6.7. Smoking and chewing of tobacco products in the examination room is prohibited.
6.8. A candidate who requires assistance should attract the attention of the Invigilator by raising
a hand.
6.9. All writing must be done in ink in the Answer book provided, and rough work should be
crossed out. Under no circumstances pages be removed from the answer book.
6.10. In an examination, candidate shall not carry out, nor attempt to carry out unfair means.
6.11 A candidate shall not bring into a room in which an examination is to be or is being
conducted, material which is prohibited.
23
6.12. At the end of the examination, candidates should remain seated in silence until all Answer
books are collected and verified by the invigilator.
6.13 No answer book used or blank, or any part thereof, shall be taken by students out of
Examination Block.
6.14 Any breach of the rules reported by Invigilator/Examiner, shall be the subject of
disciplinary action thereafter.
D. COURSE EVALUATION
1 Rules for Theory ESE course Evaluation/Assessment
1.1. Before taking answer sheet for assessment, course co-ordinator should submit marking
scheme or model answer sheet or both to CoE (If model answer sheets are not provided at the
time of question paper submission)
1.2. If the faculty member is unable to provide marking scheme or model answer sheet or both
then he/she should submit undertaking regarding confidentiality and integrity of the assessment
process (Assessment should be uniform for all the answer sheets)
1.3. Faculty members should preferably avoid mobile phones in the assessment room.
1.4. Faculty members are not allowed to take photograph of any answer sheets
1.5. Faculty members are not allowed to take bags or any other material (consolidated mark sheet
of ISE-I, ISE-II, ISE- III (CT, TA) is not allowed) in the assessment section
1.6. It is mandatory to assess/evaluate answer sheets in given time period only
2. Assessment by Course Coordinator
2.1. Course Evaluation shall be done through grading system prescribed in document of the
Rules and Regulations of UG & PG/ Programmes.
2.2. Course Coordinator shall evaluate the academic performance of ISE, Assignment, Teachers
Assessment, Tutorials, Practical’s, Term work, Field work, Seminar, Project, End Semester
Examination, Re- Examination, and Rechecking
2.3. Chief Course Coordinator shall set the common question paper for End Semester
Examination and Re-Examination for a particular course. However for ISE, respective Course
Coordinators may set Separate Question paper for a particular Course. However in extra ordinary
situation, decision regarding paper setting or allied issues, shall be taken by Chairman EC.
24
2.4. The evaluation work may be assigned, if necessary, to a person other than Course
Coordinator. However, the Course Coordinator shall arrange for his substitute in case of such
unavoidable circumstances, and intimate the same in writing to COE Cell duly signed by both of
them.
2.5. The concerned Course Coordinator shall preserve the Answer books of ISE for 12 months
before handing over to the departmental store for disposal.
2.6. After assessment of paper of ISE, individual course coordinator shall display the marks
obtained by all examinee in the respective course, and shall clarify queries from students, if any,
at his/her level, and do the necessary corrections in the marks, if any. The course coordinator
shall not entertain any person other than the student himself/herself in such cases.
2.7. For practical/oral examinations external examiner proposed by respective BoS, shall be from
outside the institute. In case the appointed external examiner is unable to report for the
examination, alternative arrangement shall be done by Chairman BoS and conduct the
examination. Such changes shall be informed to the COE Cell for record.
2.8. For Practical / oral examination of Dissertation-II in case of M. Tech courses, BoS may
appoint external examiner preferably a PG faculty of appropriate discipline.
2.9 After every ESE/Re-ESE, the answer books would be stacked in center assessment center of
the COE Cell.
2.10 The answer books would be made available to faculty members for assessment soon after
the respective course examination is over. However the period of assessment after the last paper
of a given exam would be three days only.
2.11. The answer books are then issued for the scrutiny, where the answer books are verified for
the totaling of marks, carrying forward marks to first page and verified unassessed answers, if
any.
2.12. After the completion of scrutiny the corrections, if any, are to be done by the evaluator and
the answer books are then handed over to the assessment centre.
2.13. The answer books mark lists as per enrollment numbers are prepared and handed over to
data entry operator.
25
3. THE GRADE SYSTEM
3.1. The grading system for UG programmes as recommended by Dean (Academics) and
approved by Academic council shall be followed for declaration of results.
3.2. For every course taken by a student, he/she is assigned a grade based on his/her combined
performance in all the heads of assessments. The grade indicates a qualitative assessment of the
student's performance and is associated with equivalent number called a grade point.
3.3 The academic performance shall be graded on a ten-point scale following guidelines given
below for undergraduate and post graduate classes.
3.3.1. The letter Grades (up to D only) awarded to a student in all the courses and shall be
converted into a semester and cumulative performance index called the Semester Grade Point
Average (SGPA) and Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA).
3. 4. RELATIVE GRADE SYSTEM FOR UG PROGRAM
Award of Grades3.4.1. Grade A++ absolute grade to be awarded to 10 % or less number of students securing
more than 80 % marks.
3.4.2. In case of students appearing for Re-examination the grade shall not be higher than A+ in
that particular course.
3.4.3. Grade D absolute grade to be awarded to a student who fails to pass the subject securing
less than 40 % marks or student remaining ABSENT in a course of End Semester Examination/
Re-Examination.
3. 4.4. The intermediate grade shall be awarded by dividing the marks equally between marks
secured by student securing A++ and C grade.
3.4.5. There shall be letter grades with associated grade points as given below:
Relative Range of Grade
Grade Point Marks
Grade Grade Point
M ≥ k1 A++ 10.0
K1 > M ≥ k2 A+ 9.0
K2 > M ≥ k3 A 8.0
26
K3 > M ≥ k4 B+ 7.0
K4> M ≥ k5 B 6.0
K5> M ≥ k6 C+ 5.0
K6 > M ≥ k7 C 4.0
M < k7 D 0
Where,
M-marks obtained out of 100,
k1 = Minimum marks of (A++-1) or maximum marks secured if no student is awarded A++
 k7=40; C=abs (kl-k71/6; k2= (k1-C); k3=k2-C; k4=k3-C; k5=k4-C; k6=k5-C
3.4.6. The SGPA and CGPA shall be calculated as per the procedure followed based on credits.
The equivalent percentage from CGPA shall be calculated as (CGPA) X 10.
3.4.7. Class is awarded on the basis of CGPA
First Division with Distinction = CGPA ≥ 7.00
First Division = 7.00 > CGPA ≥ 6.00
Second Division = 6.00> CGPA ≥ 5.00
Pass Class = CGPA < 5.00
* Absolute grading shall apply if the number of students is less than 20 for End semester
examinations and its subsequent Re-examination
Range of Marks (%) Grade Grade Point
91-100 A++ 10.0
82-90 A+ 9.0
73-81 A 8.0
64-72 B+ 7.0
56-63 B 6.0
 48-55 C+ 5.0
40-47 C 4.0
0-39 D 0
27
3.5. RELATIVE GRADE SYSTEM FOR PG PROGRAM (M.Tech &MCA)
Award of Grades3.5.1. Grade A++ absolute grade to be awarded to 10 % or less number of students securing
more than 90 % marks.
 3.5.2. In case of students appearing for Re-examination the grade shall not be higher than A+ in
that particular course.
3.5.3. Grade D absolute grade to be awarded to a student who fails to pass the subject securing
less than 50 % marks or student remaining ABSENT in a course of End Semester Examination/
Re-Examination.
 3.5.4. The intermediate grade shall be awarded by dividing the marks equally between marks
secured by student securing A++ and C+ grade.
3.5.5. There shall be letter grades with associated grade points as given below:
Relative Range of Grade
Grade Point Marks
Grade Grade Point
M ≥ k1 A++ 10.0
K1 > M ≥ k2 A+ 9.0
K2 > M ≥ k3 A 8.0
K3 > M ≥ k4 B+ 7.0
K4> M ≥ k5 B 6.0
K5> M ≥ k6 C+ 5.0
M < k6 D 0
Where,
M-marks obtained out of 100,
k1 = Minimum marks of (A++-1) or maximum marks secured if no student is awarded
 A++
 k6=50; C=abs (kl-k61/6; k2= (k1-C); k3=k2-C; k4=k3-C; k5=k4-C
These rules are applicable for following semesters
a) First, second, third and Fourth semester of MCA programme
b) First, second and third semester of M.Tech. Full time programme
c) First, Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth semester of M.Tech. Part time programme.
28
d) In case of Dissertation-II/Project, of Fourth semester of M.Tech. and Sixth
semester of M.Tech. Part time programme the grades will be as Follows,
Range of Marks (%) Grade Grade Point
91-100 A++ 10.0
82-90 A+ 9.0
74-81 A 8.0
66-73 B+ 7.0
58-65 B 6.0
50-57 C+ 5.0
Below 50 D 0
3.5.6. The SGPA and CGPA shall be calculated as per the procedure followed based on
credits. The equivalent percentage from CGPA shall be calculated as (CGPA) X 10.
3.5.7. Class is awarded on the basis of CGPA
First Division with Distinction = CGPA ≥ 7.25
First Division = 7.25 > CGPA ≥ 6.25
Second Division = 6.25> CGPA ≥ 5.25
Pass Class = CGPA < 5.25
* Absolute grading shall apply if the number of students is less than 10 for End semester
examinations and its subsequent Re-examination
Range of Marks (%) Grade Grade Point
91-100 A++ 10.0
82-90 A+ 9.0
74-81 A 8.0
66-73 B+ 7.0
58-65 B 6.0
50-57 C+ 5.0
Below 50 D 0
4. OPEN HOUSE
Open house shall be conducted for end semester Examination and Re-Examination.
29
Coe shall prepare a schedule of open house and circulate to all the department
coordinators/DCOEs/HODs
5. GRADE MODERATION
5.1. Examination Committee shall identify the boundary cases for theory courses (ISE I+ISE
II+ISE III+ESE marks) up to 03 marks required for passing (37 for UG and 47 for PG) and
report those to the evaluator before open house
5.2 Examination Committee shall appoint an Institute Grade Moderation Committee for overall
 monitoring of academic evaluation.
5.4. The Chairman BOS/HOD shall constitute a Departmental Grade .Moderation Committee for
a particular programme. One of the members of the DGMC shall be Chairman.
5.5. All concerned faculty members (Course Coordinator) should invariably be present for the
Departmental Grade Moderation Committee meeting. In case, someone is going out on institute
duty, he/she will hand over his/her inputs for moderation with a colleague, who should present it
in the meeting.
5.6. The Departmental Grade Moderation Committee shall do the moderation of ISE I, ISE II,
ISE III
6. RESULT
The result of each examination shall be declared in the form of grades and stored in the form of
soft and hard copy.
7. IMPROVEMENT IN CLASS OBTAINED AT GRADUATE EXAMINATION
The institute shall provide a facility for improvement in class obtained at graduate examination
for candidates securing CGPA of less than 6.00 Subject to following conditions
7.1. The improvement in class is offered for B Tech. Final year ESE only.
7.2. This facility is extended within three years of passing the final B.Tech. Examination and
available in theory courses of final year only.
30
7.3. The candidate shall avail maximum of three attempts in minimum of two courses of a
semester with a facility to retain the best performance. The total grade shall not be lowered due
to these additional attempts.
 7.4. The candidate should pass in all the subjects selected for improvement.
7.5. The candidate will not be able to change the selected courses in subsequent attempts.
7.6. The candidate shall pay the examination fees as declared by the institute from time to time.
7.7. The candidate will have to surrender original grade card issued earlier to facilitate issue of
new grade card. New grade card will be issued only if the grade is improved
E. REGULATIONS REGARDING UNFAIR MEANS
1. UNFAIR MEANS COMMITTED BY THE STUDENT
1.1 The Examination Committee shall be the competent authority to take disciplinary action
against a student for his misconduct due to unfair means committed by him at the
examination conducted by the Institute.
1.2 Definitions Unless the context otherwise requires,
1.2.1. “Student” means and includes a person who is controlled as such try the Institute for
receiving instruction qualifying for any degree, or certification awarded by the University /
Institute. It includes ex-student and student registered as candidate for any of the Degree, or
Certificated Examinations.
1.2.2. “Unfair Means” It means and includes one or more of the following acts of omissions
on the part of students during the examination period:
1.2.2.1. Possessing unfair means material and or copying there from.
1.2.2.2. Transcribing any unauthorized material or any other use thereof.
1.2.2.3. Intimidating or using obscene language or threatening or use of violence against
invigilator or person on duty for the conduct of examination or man-handling him/her or
leaving the examination hall without permission of the invigilator or causing disturbances in
any manner in the examination proceedings.
1.2.2.4. Unauthorized communication with other examinees or any one else inside or outside
the examination hall.
31
1.2.2.5. Mutual/Mass copying
1.2.2.6. Smuggling out, either blank or written answerbook, or smuggling in of answerbook
as copying material
1.2.2.7. Smuggling in blank or written answerbook, and forging signature of invigilator
therein.
1.2.2.8. Interfering with or counterfeiting of Institute seal or answer books or office
stationary used in the examination.
1.2.2.9. Insertion of currency notes in the answer books or attempting to bribe any of the
persons connected with conduct of examinations.
1.2.2.10. Impersonation at the Institution examination.
1.2.2.11. Revealing identity in any form in the answer written or in any other part of the
answer book by the student at the institute examination.
1.2.2.12. Any other similar act/s and omission/s, which may be considered as unfair means
by the competent authority.
1.2.3. Unfair means relating to examination means and includes directly or indirectly
communicating, or attempting to commit, or threatening to commit any act of coercion, or
unfair means with a view to obtain wrongful gain to himself/herself, or to any other
person(s).
1.2.4 Unfair means material means and includes any material whatsoever, related to subject
of the examination, printed, type, handwritten or otherwise on the person or on clothes, or
body of the form of chart,diagram,map or drawing or electronic aid etc., which is not
allowed in the examination hall.
1.2.5. Possession of unfair means material by a student means having any unauthorized
material on his/her person or desk or chair or table or at any place within his/her reach, in the
examination center and its envies or premises at any time from the commencement of the
examination till its conclusion.
1.2.6. Student found in possession means a student reported in writing as having been found
in possession of unfair means material by Invigilator, member of the Vigilance committee,
Examination squad or any other person related with conduct of examination, even if the
unfair means material is not produced as evidence because of its being reported as swallowed
or destroyed, or snatched away or otherwise taken away, or spoiled by the student, or by any
32
other person acting on his behalf, to such an extent that it has become illegible. Provided
report to that effect is submitted by the Invigilator or any other authorized person to the
Controller of Examinations, Principal or Head of the Institute concerned or any officer
otherwise in this behalf.
1.2.7 Material related to the subject of Examination means and included, if the material is
produced as evidence, any material certified as related to the subject of examination by a
competent person, and if the material is not produced as evidence or has become illegible for
any of the reasons refers to in clause above, the presumption shall be that the material did
relate to the subject of the examination.
1.3. Chief conductor means and includes Principal of college concerned or head of the
recognized institution where examination is being conducted and any other person duly authorize
by him/her or person appointed as incharge of examination. The Principal of the college, or Head
of the recognized Institution shall be the competent authority to take disciplinary action against a
student for his misconduct due to unfair mean committed by him at the examination.
1.4. Where the examination of the Institute courses are conducted by the Institute the
Principal/Head of the concerned college/recognized Institute, on receipt of a report regarding use
of unfair means by any student at any such examination, including breach of the rule laid down
by the Institute for proper conduct of examination, shall have power at any time to conduct
enquiry, and to punish for such unfair means or breach of any of the rule by exclusion of such a
student from any such examination or Institute, either permanently or for a specified period, or
by cancellation of the result of the student in the Institute examination for which he/she
appeared, or by deprivation of any Institution scholarship, or cancellation of the award of any
college/Institute prize or medal to him/her, or by imposition of fine, or two or more of the
aforesaid ways.
1.5. During examination, examinees and other student shall be under disciplinary control of the
Principal.
1.6. Co-ordinator the examination center shall, in the case of unfair means, follow the procedure
as under:
1.6.1. The student shall be called upon to surrender to the Co-ordinator, the unfair means
material found in his or her possession, if any, and his/her Answer book.
33
1.6.2. Signature of the concerned student shall be obtained on the relevant material and
list thereon. Concerned Invigilator and the Co-ordinator shall also sign on all the relevant
material and documents.
1.6.3. Statement of the student and his undertaking in the prescribed format and the
statement of the concerned Invigilator shall be recorded in writing by the Chief
Conductor. If the student refuses to make statement or to give undertaking, the concerned
Invigilator or Co-ordinator shall record accordingly under their signature.
1.6.4. Co-ordinator shall take one or more of following decisions depending upon
seriousness/gravity of the case:
1.6.4.1. Confiscate his/her answer book, and mark it as “suspected unfair means case and
issue him/her fresh answer book duly signed by invigilator.
1.6.4.2. May report the case to the concerned Police Station as per the provisions of
Maharashtra Universities Act No. XXXI 2016 an act to provide for preventing unfair
means at university Board and other specified examinations.
1.6.4.3. In the case of impersonation or violence, expel the concerned student from the
examination and not allow him/her to appear for remaining examination.
1.6.5. All the material and list of material mentioned in sub-clause 1.2.4 and the
undertaking with the statement of the student and that of the Invigilator as mentioned in
clause No 1.6.3 and the answer-book/s shall be forwarded by the Co-ordinator along with
his report to the concerned Controller of Examinations/Principal/Head of the Institution,
as the case may be, in a separate and confidential sealed envelope, marked 'suspected
unfair means case'
1.6.6. In case of unfair means of oral type, the Invigilator or concerned Authorized person
shall record the facts in writing and shall report the same to the concerned coordinator/Controller of examinations /Head of Institutions, as the case may be.
1.7. At the time of assessment of answer books, if the examiner suspects that there is
prima-facie evidence that, the concerned student appears to have restored to unfair means
in the examination, the examiner shall forward his/her report, along with the evidence, to
the concerned Controller of Examinations/Head of Institutions, as the case may be, with
34
his/her opinion in separate confidential sealed envelope marked as 'suspected unfair
means case.
1.8. Case of unfair means having, prima-facing, reported by the Co-ordinator / Invigilator and /or
Examiners shall be inquired into by the committee appointed by the Examination
committee/Principal/Head of Institute, as the case may be, it shall proceed for further
investigation. The officer appointed by Head of the Institute shall be the presenting officer of the
case before the police authorities and court of justice and shall deal with the case till it is finally
disposed off.
1.9. Examination Result/s of the concerned student/s involved in such cases shall be held in
reserve till the competent authority takes the final decision in the matter and the concerned
student/s shall be informed accordingly.
1.10. APPOINTMENT OF UNFAIR MEANS ENQUIRY COMMITTEE
1.10.1. For the purpose of investigating unfair means resorted to by students at the Examination;
the Examination Committee shall appoint a committee called Examination Sub Committee
(ESC) following the guidelines given in University Statutes.
1.10.2. The unfair means inquiry committee will function as a recommendatory body, and submit
its recommendations, in the form of report, to the concerned competent authority, which will
issue final orders with regard to the penal action to be taken against the student/s, after taking
into account the reported facts and findings of case by the committee, and after ensuring whether
reasonable opportunity has been given to the concerned implicated student in his/her defense, the
principle of natural justice has been followed, and the recommended quantum of punishment is
in accordance with the guidelines laid down in the behalf.
1.11. PROCEDURE OF THE EXAMINATION SUB COMMITTEE SHOULD BE AS
UNDER
The Controller of Examinations / Principal of the College of Head of the recognized Institution
or the Officer authorized by them, as the case may be, shall inform the student concerned, in
writing, of the act of unfair means alleged to have been committed by his/her and shall ask
35
him/her to show cause, as to why the charge/s leveled against him/her should not be held as
proved, and the punishment stipulated in the show cause notice be imposed.
1.11.2 The student shall be asked to appear before the enquiry committee on the day at a time
and place fixed for the meeting, with written reply/explanation to the show cause notice served
on him/her therein. The student himself/herself only shall present his/her case before the
committee.
1.11.3. The document that are being taken into consideration, or are to be relied upon for the
purpose of proving charge/s against the student, shall be shown to him/her by the enquiry
committee, when the student presents himself/herself before the committee.
1.11.4. Reasonable opportunity, including oral hearing, shall be given to the student in his/her
defense before the committee. The committee, before giving final recommendations in the case,
shall consider the reply/explanation given by the student to the show cause notice.
1.11.5. The committee should follow the above procedure in the spirit of the principle of natural
justice.
1.11.6. After serving a show cause notice, if the implicated student fails to appear before the
enquiry committee on the day, time and place fixed for the meeting, the student may be given
one more opportunity to appear before the committee. Even after these two chances, if the
concerned student fails to appear before the committee, the committee shall take decision in
his/her case in his/her absentia, on the basis of the documents available.
1.11.7. The committee shall submit its report to the concerned competent authority along with its
recommendations regarding punishment to be inflicted on or otherwise.
1.12. PUNISHMENT:
The Principal, after taking into consideration the report of the committee, shall pass such orders
as it deem fit, including granting the student benefit of doubt, issuing warning or exoneration to
him/her from the charges, and shall impose any one or more of the following punishment on the
student/s found guilty of using unfair means.
1.12.1. Annulment of performance of the student in full or in part in the examination he/she has
appeared for.
36
1.12.2. Debarring student from appearing for any Examination of the Institution for a stipulated
period not exceeding five years.
1.12.3 Debarring student from taking admission for any course in the Institution for a stipulated
period not exceeding five years.
1.12.4. Cancellation of the scholarship/s or award/s prize or medal etc, awarded to him/her in
that examination.
1.12.5. In addition to the above-mentioned punishment, the competent authority may impose a
fine on the student declared guilty. If the student concerned fails to pay the fine within a
stipulated period,
the competent authority may impose on such a student additional punishment/penalty as it may
deem fit.
1.12.6. The student concerned shall be informed of the punishment fully imposed on him/her in
writing, by the competent authority or by the officer authorized by it in his behalf, under
intimation to the College/Institution he/she belongs to.
1.12.7. An appeal against the findings of the committee shall lie with the concerned competent
authority whose decision shall be final and binding.
1.12.8. An appeal made in writing within a period of 30 days from the date of imposition of the
punishment, shall be considered by the competent authority on merit, and it shall be decided on
the basis of the evidence available in the case, and shall be beard in person in deserving cases, if
the competent authority finds substance in the appeal, the competent authority shall supply a
typed copy of relevant extract of fact-finding report of the inquiry committee, as well as
documents relied upon (if not strictly confidential) pertaining to his/her case to
appellant/petitioner, if applied for in writing. Decision to the appeal shall be informed to the
student concerned accordingly.
1.12.9. The respective competent authority shall deal with the court matters in respect of the
unfair means cases.
1.12.10. As far as possible, the quantum of punishment should be as prescribed in Appendix- I
37
2. UNFAIR MEANS USED OR LAPSES COMMITTED BY ANY PAPER SETTERS
/EXAMINERS / ODERATORS, REFEREES / TEACHERS OR ANY OTHER PERSONS
CONNCETED WITH THE CONDUCT OF EXAMINATION.
2.1. The Examination Committee shall be competent authority to take appropriate disciplinary
action against the paper setter, examiners, moderators, referees, teachers or any other person
connected with the conduct of examination, committing laps or using, attempting to use aiding,
abetting, instigating or allowing to use unfair means/s at the examination conducted by the
Institute.
2.2 The staff who does not perform the examination duties as per examination rules and
schedule shall be given a chance for self correction and, if required, the Principal shall use his
discretionary power to take the appropriate corrective measures, which may include making
relevant entries in the service book of the concerned person. The service of the erring temporary
staff may be terminated by the Principal, if found necessary.
2.3. Definitions: unless the context otherwise requires
2.3.1. Paper Setter, Examiner, Moderator, Referee and Teacher means and includes person/s duly
appointed as such for the examination by the competent authority, and also any other person
connected with the conduct of examination, appointed by the competent authority.
 2.3.2. Unfair means/lapses includes one or more of the following acts or omissions on the part of
the person/s included in 2.3.1 above.
2.3.2.1. Leakage of Question/s or Question Paper Set at the Institute examination, before the time
of examination.
2.3.2.2. Examiner/Moderator, intentionally awarding marks to student in assessment of answer
books, dissertation or project work, to which the student is not entitled, or not assigning marks to
the student to which the student is entitled.
2.3.2.3. Paper Setter omitting question or setting question outside the scope of syllabus.
2.3.2.4. Examiner/Referee showing negligence in detecting unfair means used by student/s.
2.3.2.5. Invigilator / Chief Conductor showing negligence / apathies in carrying out duties:
(Siding/ abetting/ allowing / instigating students to use unfair means/s)
2.3.2.6. Or any other similar act/s and or omissions/s, which may be considered as unfair means
or lapses by the competent authority.
38
2.3.3. Unfair means or lapses relating to examination means and includes directly committing, or
attempting to commit, or threatening to commit any act of unfair means, fraud or undue
influence with a view to obtain wrongful gain to him/her, or any other person or causing
wrongful loss to other person/s, or omitting to do what he/she is bound to do as duties.
3. REGULATIONS REGARDING UNFAIR MEANS RESORTED TO BY THE
STUDENT/PAPER SETTERS / EXAMINERS / MODERATORS, REFEREES
TEACHERS OR ANY OTHER PERSONS CONNCETED WITH THE CONDUCT OF
EXAMINATION.
 3.1 the On receipt of a report regarding use of unfair means by any student at any examination,
including breach of any of the rules laid down by the Institution Authorities, Examination
Committee shall have power, at any time, to institute for proper conduct of Examination, inquiry,
and to punish such unfair means or breach of the rules, exchision of such student from any
examination from Recognized Institution or from any convocation for the purpose of conferring
degree, either permanently or for a specified period, or by cancellation of the result of the student
in the examination for which the student appeared, or by deprivation of any scholarship held by
him/her, or by cancellation of the award of any prize or medal to him/her, or by imposition of
fine, or in any two or more of the aforesaid ways, within a period of one year.
3.2. On receipt of report regarding unfair means used or laps committed by any paper setter,
examiner, moderator, referees, teacher or any other person connected with the conduct of
examination held by the Institution, including breach of the rules laid down for proper conduct of
examination, the Examination Committee, shall have power, at any time, to institute inquiry and
to punish such unfair means or lapses by declaring the concerned person disqualified for the
conduct of any examination work, either permanently or for a specified period, or by referring
his/her case to the rules provided for, or in any two or more of the aforesaid ways.
3.3. INVESTIGATING COMMITTEE
3.3.1. The committee appointed by the Examination Committee to investigate unfair means
resorted to by student/s at the examination, shall also investigate the cases of unfair means used
39
and or lapses committed by the paper setters, examiners, moderators, referees, teachers or any
other persons connected with the conduct of examinations.
3.4. PROCEDURE FOR INVESTIGATION
3.4.1. The cases of alleged use of unfair means or lapses committed by the paper setters,
examiners, moderators, referees, teachers or any other persons connected with the conduct of
examinations shall be scrutinized by the concerned Officer/In-charge of the sub-section/Unit to
which the case is primarily pertained at the examination section of the Institution, collect
preliminary information to find out whether there is prima-facie case so as to fix up primary
responsibility for framing a charge sheet and then shall submit the said case with his primary
report to the concerned competent authority. If the competent authority is satisfied that there is a
prima-facie case, it shall place the same before the unfair means inquiry committee for further of
the Investigation. The concerned officer appointed by the head Institution shall be the presenting
officer of the case before the enquiry committee, Police Authorities and court of justice and shall
deal with the case till it is finally disposed off.
3.4.2. The competent authority, or the officer authorized by, in this behalf, shall inform the
implicated persons (paper setter, examiner, moderator, referees, teacher, or any other person
connected with the conduct of examination) in writing of act of unfair means used, and or lapses
committed by him/her at examination, and shall ask him/her how cause, as to why the charge/s
leveled against him/her should not be held as proved, and the punishment stipulated in the show
cause notice be impose.
3.4.3. The concerned person be asked to appear before the inquiry committee on a day, time and
place fixed for meeting, with written reply/explanation to the show cause notice served on
him/her, and charge levelled against him/her therein. The concerned person himself/herself only
shall present his/her cause before the committee.
3.4.4. The documents that are being taken into consideration to be relied upon for the purpose of
proving charge/s against the concerned person, shall be shown to him/her by the inquiry
committee, if he/she presents himself/herself before the committee. The evidence, if any should
be recorded in presence of the delinquent.
40
3.4.5. Reasonable opportunity, including oral hearing, shall be given to the concerned person in
his/her defense before the committee. The reply/explanation given to the show cause notice shall
also be considered by the committee before making final report/recommendation.
3.4.6. The committee should follow the above procedure in the spirit of principle of natural
justice.
3.4.7. If the concerned person fails to appear before the committee on the day, time and place
fixed for the meeting, he/she shall be given one more opportunity to appear before the committee
in his/her defense. Even after offering two chances, if the concerned person fails to appear before
the committee, the committee shall take decision in his/her case, in his/her absentia on the basis
of whatever evidences/document available before it, and same shall be binding on the concerned
implicated person.
3.4.8. The committee shall submit its report to the concerned competent Authority with its
recommendation regarding punishment to be inflicted on the concerned person or otherwise.
3.5 PUNISHMENT
The competent authority, after taking into consideration the report of the PUNISHMENT
committee shall pass such orders as it deems fit including granting the exonerating implicated
person benefit of doubt, issuing warning or him/her from the charge/s and shall impose any one
or more of the following punishments on the implicated person found guilty of using unfair
means or committing lapses at the examinations.
 3.5.1. Declaring disqualified the concerned paper-setter, examiner, moderator, referee, teacher
or any other person connected with the conduct of examination, from any examination work
either permanently or for a specified period.
3.5.2. Imposing fine, if the concerned person fails to pay the fine within a stipulated period, the
competent authority may impose on such a person additional punishment/penalty, as it may deem
fit.
3.5.3. Referring his/her case to the concerned disciplinary authorities for taking such disciplinary
action as deemed fit as per the rules governing his/her service conditions.
41
3.5.4. The competent authority or the officer authorized in this behalf, shall inform the concerned
person of the decision taken in his/her case and punishment imposed on him/her.
3.5.5. An appeal made within 30 days of imposition of the punishment other than the punishment
referred to clause no. 3.5.3 above, shall lie with the examination committee, and their decision
in the appeal shall be final and binding
3.5.6. The competent authority shall supply a typed copy of the relevant extract of fact finding
report of the inquiry committee, as well as the documents relied upon (if not strictly
confidential), pertaining his/her case to the appellant /petitioner, if applied for in writing
3.5.7. The court matters in respective cases of unfair means/lapses should be dealt with by the
respective competent authority.
3.5.8. As far as possible, the quantum of punishment should be prescribed in Appendix-II
F. AMENDMENT OF RESULT
1. DUE TO ERROR
1.1. ERROR MEANS
1.1.1. Error in computer/data entry, printing or programming, and the likewise.
1.1.2. Clerical error, manual or machine, installing or entering marks on ledger/register.
1.1.3. Error due to negligence or oversight of examiner or any other person connected
with evaluation, moderation, rechecking and result preparation.
1.2. In any case, where it is found that the result of an examination has been affected by
errors, the Controller of Examinations shall have power to amend such result in such manner as
shall be in accordance with the true position, and to make such declaration as is necessary, with
the necessary approval of the Chairman, Examination Committee, provided the errors are
reported / detected within six months from the date of declaration of results. Errors detected
thereafter shall be placed before the Examination Committee.
2. DUE TO FRAUD, MALPRACTICE ETC :
In any case, where the result of an examination has been ascertained and published, and it is
found that such result has been affected by any unfair found, or any other improper conduct
whereby an examinee has been benefited, and that such examinee, in the opinion of the
42
Examination Committee, means has been party, or privy to or connived at such unfair means,
fraud or improper conduct, the Examination Committee shall have power, at any time,
notwithstanding the issue of the certificate or the award of a prize of scholarship. to amend the
result of such examinee, and to make such declaration as the examination Committee considers
necessary in that behalf.
G . GRIEVANCES AND REDRESSAL
Student’s grievances about examinations, if any, shall be dealt with by the Controller of
Examinations, or by any other office/committee, or by Institute Standing Committee (ISC)
appointed by the Principal.
H. APPEALS
1. The Head of the Department should complete the Examination Appeals Form and submit this,
together with the student's letter of appeal, and any relevant medical or other certificate to the
Chairman, Examination Committee.
2. The decision of the Examination Committee shall be communicated to the student, COE,
HOD, Registrar (Academic) and Dean (Academic) for the purpose of maintaining the student
record.
I. PRESERVATION OF RECORD AND VARIOUS DOCUMENTS OF CONTROLLER
OF EXAMINATION CELL
The preservation of records and various documents of the office of Controller of Examination
shall be as per Appendix –III
43
APPENDIX- I
THE BROAD CATAGORIES OF UNFAIR MEANS ADOPTED BY STUDENTS AT
THE UNIVERSITY / COLLEGE / INSTITUTION EXAMINATION AND THE
QUANTUM OF PUNISHMENT FOR EACH CATEGORY THERE OF
Sr. No. Nature of Unfair means Quantum of Punishment
1 Possession of copying material Annulment of the performance of the
student/s Institution Examination in
full (Note This quantum of
punishment shall apply also to the
following categories of unfair means
at Sr.No. 1 to Sr.No.12 in addition to
the Punishment prescribed there at)
2 Actual copying from the copying Material Exclusion Institution of the student
from examination for one additional
Examination.
3 Possession of Other Students Answer Book Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for one
additional Examination. (Both the
Students)
4 Possession of Other Students Answer Book +
actual evidence of copying there from
Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for two
additional Examinations. (Both the
Students)
5 Mutual Mass Copying Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for two
additional Examinations.
6 (a) Smuggling out or smuggling in of Exclusion of
the student from Answer Book as copying
material
Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for two
additional Examinations.
44
(b) Smuggling in of written answer book based on
the question paper set at the Examination
Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for three
additional Examinations.
(C) Smuggling in of written answer book and
forging signature of the invigilator thereon
Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for four
additional Examinations.
7 Attempt to forge signature of invigilator on the
answer book of Supplement
Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for four
additional Examinations.
8 Interfering with or counterfeiting of Exclusion
of Institution seal of Answer books or office
stationary used in the additional Examination
Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for four
additional Examinations.
9 Answer book main or supplement written
outside the examination hall or any other
insertion in answer book
Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for four
additional Examinations.
10 Insertion of currency notes/to bribe or
attempting to bribe any of the persons/s
connected with the additional Examinations.
Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for four
additional Examinations. (This
money shall be Credited to the
account of C.O.E.)
11 Using obscene language / violence /threat at
the examination centre by a student at the
Institution Examination to invigilator / Chief
Conductor of Examinations
Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for four
additional Examinations.
12 Impersonation at the
university/College/Institution Examination
Exclusion of the student from
Institution examination for five
additional Examinations.( Both the
Students if impersonator is University
or College or Institute Student)
13 Revealing Identity in any form in the Answer
written or in any other part of answer book by
Annulment of the performance of the
student at the Institution Examination
45
the student at the Institution Examination in full.
14 Found having written on palms or Annulment
of the performance of the on the Body, or on
the clothes student at the Institution
Examination
Annulment of the performance of the
student at the Institution Examination
in full.
15 Carrying mobile or allied instruments Rs. 1500/- Fine
16 All other unfair means not covered in the
aforesaid categories
Annulment of the performance of the
student at the Institution Examination
in full and serve punishmen
depending upon the gravity of the
offence.
Note:
1 The term 'annulment of performance in full' includes performance of the student of the theory
as well as annual practical examination, but does not include performance at term work, project
work and dissertation examination unless unfair means used there at.
2 If, on previous occasion, a disciplinary action was taken against a student for unfair means
used at examination, and he/she is caught again for unfair means used at the examination in this
event he/she shall be dealt with severely. Enhanced punishment can be imposed on such student.
This enhanced punishment may extend to double the punishment provided for the offence when
committed in the second or subsequent examination.
3 Student involved in unfair means at practical / dissertation / project report/ defense
examination shall be dealt with as per the punishment provided for the theory examination.
4 The competent authority, in addition to the above mentioned punishments, may impose a fine
on the student declared guilty.
APPENDIX II
ACTION FOR MALPRACTICES/ LAPSE ON THE PART OF PAPER STEER/
EXAMINERS/ MODERATORS/RECHECKERS/REFEREE / TEACHER OR ANY
46
OTHER PERSON CONNECTED WITH THE CONDUCT OF UNIVERSITY
/COLLEGE/INSTITUTE EXAMINATION
Sr. No. Nature of Unfair means / Lapses Punishment
1 Paper setter found responsible for leakage of
the question paper set in the Institution
Examination/s whether intentionally or due to
the negligence before the time of examination.
Disqualification from any Exam
Work plus Disciplinary action by the
concerned as per the rules applicable.
2 Leakage of the question / question paper set in
the Institution Examination before the time of
examination at the Institution Examination or
Examination centre by any person/s connected
with the conduct of Examination.
Disciplinary action against the guilty
/ responsible person/s as per the
prevailing rules/standard codes by
concerned authorities.
3 Favoring a student (Examination) by
Examiner, Moderator, rechecker and referee in
assessment of answer book /
Dissertation/project report / thesis by assigning
the student mark to which the student is not
entitled to Institute examination
Disqualification from any Exam
Work plus Disciplinary action by the
concerned authorities.
4 Examiner / Moderator / Referee
internationally/ negligently not assigning the
student in assessment of his/her answer
books/dissertation /thesis / project work, the
mark to which the student is entitled to at the
Institution Examinations
Disqualification from any Exam
Work plus Disciplinary action by the
concerned authorities.
5 Paper setter omitting the question at the time
of finalization of question paper set at the
examination or repeating Sr. No. of question
while writing
Disqualification from any Exam
Work for a period of three years.
6 Paper setter repeating questions in same /
different section/ s
Disqualification from any Exam
Work for a period of three years.
47
7 Paper setter setting questions outside the scope
of the syllabus.
Disqualification from any Exam
Work for a period of three years.
8 While assessing Answer Examiners showing
negligence in detecting unfair means used by
the student/s
As decided by the authorities of the
Institution
9 Guiding teacher showing negligence in
supervision of dissertation/project work/thesis
(e.g. use of manipulated data by a student)
As decided by the authorities of the
Institution
10 Invigilator /Chief Conductor showing apathy
in carrying out duties related to examinations
(eg not taking round in the examination hall at
the examination period or opening the packet
of question paper before prescribed time)
As decided by the authorities of the
Institution
11 Invigilator helping student copying answer
while in examination or showing negligence in
reporting cases of copying answer by student
when on supervision duty Invigilator helping
student when on supervision duty
Disqualification from any Exam
Work for a period of three years plus
Disciplinary action by the concerned
authorities as per the rules if he/she is
Institute Employee.
12 Invigilator helping student (examinee) in mass
copying while on examination duty.
Permanent disqualification from any
exam work plus disciplinary action
by authorities as per the rules if
she/he is a Institute Employee.
13 The competent authority, in addition to the above mentioned punishment, a fine on the
concerned person, if declared guilty.
14 The competent authority may report the case of the concerned implicated person to the
appropriate police authorities as per the provisions of the Maharashtra University Act
No. XXXI of 1982.
48
APPENDIX-III
PRESERVATION OF RECORD AND VARIOUS DOCUMENTS
Sr. No. Nature of Document Preservation Duration
1 Result Sheets Permanent
2 Bills and Note Books 5 Years
3 Reports/Committee papers Permanent
4 Student applications Exam forms 5 Years
5 Various mark lists 5 Years
6 Mark Sheets Permanent
7 Online Correspondence 5 Years
8 Inward/Outward registers 5 Years
9 Unfair means related papers 5 Years
10 Purchase related papers / application 1 Years
11 Exam related student application 1 Years
12 Answer Sheets of ESE/ Re Examination 1 Years
13 Proposal related correspondence 1 Years
14 Question paper related / policy correspondence Permanent
15 Question papers originals 1 Years
16 Used question papers 1 Years
17 Important Correspondence / documents Permanent
18 Answer Sheets of ISE(class test) 1Years
19 Answer Sheets of Practical Examination 1Years
Note: All papers / material other than under preservation shall be made available in partly
destructed form, for sale / auction as per official procedure