RULES AND REGULATIONS
NEP COMPLIANT CURRICULUM
FOR
UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMME
Bachelor of Technology
w.e.f. 2023-2024
Revised & approved in 28th Academic Council Meeting held on 25h June 2024
 GOVERNMENT COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AURANGABAD
 (An Autonomous Institute of Govt. of Maharashtra)
 Station Road, Osmanpura, Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar Aurangabad- 431005 (M.S.)
 +91-240- 2366101, 2366111
CONTENTS
1. Introduction
2. Definitions
3. Academic Calendar
4. Registration
5. Credit & Evaluation System
6. Add / Drop
7. Attendance Requirements
8. Absence during the Semester
9. Credit Transfer
10. Withdrawal from the Programme
11. Multiple Exit and Entry Path
12. Conduct and Discipline
13. Graduation Requirements & Convocation
14. Committees and Functionaries
15. Annexure A

The General Regulations are in force for the students taking admission for the
first year in engineering from the year 2023-2024 and Onwards for a full-time
undergraduate course.
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The General Regulations that are common to all Degree Programmes of
Government College of Engineering, Aurangabad are presented here.
Specific aspects of the Regulations pertaining to a particular Degree
Programme are given separately along with the corresponding Curriculum.
1.2 The provisions contained in this set of Regulations govern the policies and
procedures, on the admission of students, imparting instructions of courses,
conducting of the examinations, and evaluation and certification of students,
performance leading to the said Degree Program(s).
1.3 This set of Regulations shall be binding on all students undergoing the said
Degree Program(s) of Government College of Engineering, Aurangabad.
1.4 This set of Regulations may evolve and get revised/refined or updated or
amended or modified or changed through appropriate approvals from the
Academic Council, from time to time, and shall be binding on all parties
concerned, including the Students, Faculty, Staff, Departments, Institute
Authorities.
1.5 In order to guarantee fairness and justice to all the parties concerned, in view
of the periodic evolutionary refinements, any specific issues or matters of
concern shall be addressed to the Academic Council, as and when found
necessary through appropriate authorities.
1.6 The Academic Council may consider any issues or matters of concern relating
to any or all the Academic activities of the Institute, for appropriate action,
irrespective of whether a reference is made (or the nature and extent of any
reference if so present) herein this set of Regulations or otherwise.
1.7 All disputes arising from this set of Regulations must be addressed to the
Academic Council. The decision of the Academic Council is final and binding
on all parties concerned. Further, any legal disputes arising from this set of
Regulations shall be limited to the legal jurisdiction Aurangabad and not that
of any other parties.
2.0 DEFINITIONS: Unless the context otherwise requires –
• “Academic Council” means, Academic Council of the Institute
• “ABC” means, Academic Bank of Credit
• “BoG” means, the Board of Governance of the Institute
• “BoS” means, the Board of Studies of the department
• “Course” means, a specific subject usually identified by its course-code and
course-title, with a specified syllabus/course
-description, a set of references, taught by some
teacher(s)/course-Coordinator(s) to a specific class (group of students)
during a specific academic-session/semester
• “Course coordinator” means, a teacher who teaches and/or coordinates
various activities of a Course
• “Curriculum” includes the set of Academic Regulations, Course Structure,
and Course-Contents
• “CET” means, Common Entrance Test conducted by competent
Authority
• “Dean (Acad)” means, the Dean (Academics)
• “Dean (SA)” means, the Dean (Student Activities)
• “Dean (R&D)” means, the Dean (Research & Development)
• “Reg Acad” means Registrar Academics
• “Faculty Advisor” means the Faculty Advisor or the Panel of Faculty
Advisors, in a Parent Department, for a group (admission-batch) of students
• “GATE” means, Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering
• “HoD” means the Head of the Department.
• “Institute”/“GEC” means, Government College of Engineering,
Aurangabad
• “NEP” means, National Education Policy 2020
• “Principal” means the Head of the Institute.
• “Programme Coordinator” means, a faculty in charge of an academic
programme
• “Parent Department” means, the department that offers the degree
programme that a student undergoes
• “ISE” means In semester Evaluation
• “ESE” means End Semester examination
ACADEMIC CALENDAR
3.1 The normal duration of the course leading to B. TECH. degree will be
EIGHT semesters.
3.2 Each academic year shall be divided into 2 semesters, each of a
minimum 90 working days duration (including Examinations duration).
3.3 The schedule of academic activities for a Semester, including the dates of
registration, In-semester evaluations, end-semester examination, re examination, intersemester vacation, etc. shall be referred to as the Academic Calendar of the Semester,
which shall be prepared by the Dean (Academic), approved by the Academic Council,
and announced at least TWO weeks before the Closing Date of the previous Semester.
3.4 The Academic Calendar must be adhered to, and all other activities including cocurricular and/or extra-curricular activities must be scheduled so as not to interfere
with the Curricular Activities as stipulated in the Academic Calendar.
3.5 Under any circumstances when any of the Teaching Days gets declared as a Holiday
or otherwise when the classes get suspended, irrespective of whatsoever be the reasons,
appropriate makeup for such loss shall be made by Programme Coordinator having the
class/lab/teaching sessions conducted on a suitable day by following the particular
Class Time-table of that Teaching Day which was so lost.
4.0 REGISTRATION
4.1 Every Student after consulting his/her Faculty-Advisor is required to register
for the approved courses of Parent Department before commencement of each
semester on the days fixed for such registration and notified in the academic
calendar. Programme coordinator will monitor and appoint Departmental
Committees in order to properly facilitate course registration. All students must
personally be present on these dates. Minimum fifteen 15 students are required for
starting a course in a UG programme. Maximum seventy (70) students can register
for any Elective Courses like Multidisciplinary Minor Courses, Honor Courses, Open
Electives per division. Head of the Institute is final authority to decide maximum
and minimum count of students per division for a course as circumstances exist.
4.2 Mandatory Pre-Registration for higher semesters:
 In order to facilitate proper planning of the academic activities of a semester, it is
essential for the student to declare their intent to register for an elective course/s well
in advance, before the actual start of the academic session, through the process of Pre-
Registration, which is mandatory for all students of second or higher semesters. The
span of pre-registration shall be declared on website and academic calendar.
4.3 All students (other than the freshly admitted students) intending to register for the
next higher semester are required to have complete the Mandatory Pre-Registration of
elective courses, at least TWO weeks before the last day of instruction specified in the
academic calendar of the current semester. To facilitate this Pre-registration, all
departments shall announce the list of courses to be offered for the next higher
semester, at least FOUR weeks before the Last Day of instruction specified in the
academic calendar of the current semester.
4.4 Students who do not register on the day announced for the purpose, may be
permitted LATE REGISTRATION by Head of Department up to the notified day in
academic calendar on payment of late fee.
4.5 REGISTRATION IN ABSENTIA will be allowed only in exceptional cases through the
authorized representatives of the student with the approval of programme coordinator/
HoD.
4.6 A student will be permitted to register in the next semester only if
he/she fulfills the following conditions:
i. Satisfies all the Academic Requirements to continue with the
programme of Studies
ii. Cleared all Institute, Hostel and Library dues and fines (if any) of the
previous semesters
iii. Paid all required advance payments of the Institute and hostel for the
current semester
iv. Not been debarred from registering on any specific ground by the
Institute.
5.0 CREDIT & EVALUATION SYSTEM
(The Grading System)
5.1 The grading system for Undergraduate Programmes as proposed by Dean
(Academics), recommended by the examination committee & approved by the
Academic council shall be followed for declaration of results. For every course taken
by a student, he/she is assigned a grade based on his/her combined performance
in all the heads of assessments. The grade indicates a qualitative assessment of
the student’s performance and is associated with an equivalent number called a
grade point.
5.2 The academic performance shall be graded on a ten-grade point scale following
guidelines given below for undergraduate classes.
5.3 The letter Grades (up to D only) awarded to a student in all the
courses shall be converted into a semester and cumulative performance
index called the Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) and Cumulative
Grade Point Average (CGPA).
5.4 RELATIVE GRADE SYSTEM FOR UG PROGRAM
Award of Grades-
 5.4.1 Grade A++ absolute grade to be awarded to 10 % or less number of
students securing more than 80 % marks.
 5.4.2 In the case of students appearing for Re-examination the grade
shall not be higher than A+ in that particular course.
 5.4.3 Grade D absolute grade to be awarded to a student who fails to
pass the subject securing less than 40 % marks or student
remaining ABSENT in a course of End Semester Examination/Re-Examination.
 5.4.4 The intermediate grade shall be divided on equal scale between a
student securing A++ and C grade.
5.4.5 There shall be letter grades with associated grade points as given
below:
Relative Range of
Marks
Grade Grade
Point
M > k1 A++ 10.0
k1>M ≥ k2 A+ 9.0
k2>M ≥ k3 A 8.0
k3>M ≥ k4 B+ 7.0
k4>M ≥ k5 B 6.0
k5>M ≥ k6 C+ 5.0
k6>M ≥ k7 C 4.0
M< k7 D 0
Detained D1 0
Drop D2 0
Withdrawn D3 0
Where,
M- marks obtained out of 100, k1 = Minimum marks of
(A++-1) or maximum marks secured if no student is awarded
A++, k7=40; C= abs (k1-k7)/6; k2= (k1-C); k3=k2-C; k4=k3 C; k5=k4-
C; k6=k5-C
5.4.6 The SGPA and CGPA shall be calculated as per the procedure
followed based on credits. The equivalent percentage from CGPA shall be
calculated as (CGPA) X 10.
5.4.7 Class is awarded on the basis of CGPA First Division with
Distinction = CGPA ≥ 7.00
First Division = 7.00 > CGPA ≥ 6.00
Second Division = 6.00 > CGPA ≥ 5.00
Pass Class = CGPA < 5.00
5.5 Evaluation System
5.5.1 Marking Scheme for theory courses will be as follows:
Sr.
No
Theory/
Practical
course
No of
credits
ISE I ISE II ISE
III
ESE Total
1 Theory 3/4 15 15 10 60 100
2 2 10 10 30 50
3 Practical 1/2 25/50 25/50/
(optional)
5.5.2 Exam Duration
Sr.
No
Marks for the
exam
Duration
1 ISE – 15 marks One Hour
2 ISE – 10 marks 45 minutes
3 ESE – 30 marks 1 Hr 30 minutes
4 ESE – 60 marks 2 Hrs 30 minutes
5.5.3 Passing criteria
Students shall pass a theory course if the total number of marks scored in
ISE I, ISE II, ISE III and ESE is greater than or equal to 40%.
Students shall pass a practical course provided the scoring is greater than or
equal to 40% separately for a Term work (ISE III normally) and Practical exam
(ESE).
6.0 ADD / DROP
6.1 ADD-option:
A student has the option to ADD courses for registration till
the date specified for late registration in the Academic Calendar.
6.2 DROP-option:
 On recommendation of the Teaching Department as well as the Parent
Department, a student has the option to DROP courses from registration until 2
weeks after the commencement of the classes in the semester, as indicated
in the Academic
Calendar.
7.0
ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS
7.1 All students must attend every lecture, tutorial and practical
class in an Offline/Online mode as the case may be.
7.2 To account for approved leave of absence (e.g. representing the
Institute in sports, games or athletics; placement activities; NCC/NSS
activities; etc.) and/or any other such contingencies like medical
emergencies, etc., the attendance requirement shall be a minimum of
75% of the classes actually conducted.
7.3 A student with less than 75% attendance and/or unsatisfactory
participation/performance in ISE evaluation in a course during a
semester, in all the academic activities will not be permitted to appear in
the ESE of the course in which the deficiency of attendance exists,
irrespective of his academic performance, and irrespective of nature of his
absence. The student will have to re register in the same course as and
when offered in the institute or he/she may have a choice to register in
an equivalent course as approved by the respective board of studies.
Absence due to illness or any other valid and genuine reason/s for a
period less than two weeks in a semester to which a student could not
make a prior application may be condoned by Head of Institute after
proper verification. 
7.4 The course coordinator shall communicate periodically the
attendance of the concerned students and shall publish list of
provisionally detained students with the reason thereof at least one week
before the last day of instruction in the current semester.
7.5 Students who do not satisfy the criteria for final grant of term shall
be finally detained by the course coordinator on the last day of instruction
and shall be communicated in writing to the concerned students, program
coordinator and controller of examination
7.6 The attendance records are to be maintained by the course
coordinator and he/she shall show it to the student, if and when required
and to be published on website.
8.0
ABSENCE DURING THE SEMESTER
8.1 Leave of Absence:
a) The leave of absence for the student for valid and genuine reasons
shall be required to be approved by faculty advisor and the programme
coordinator at appropriate time with supporting documents.
b) The faculty advisor/programme coordinator may on receipt of
such request in writing shall grant leave under genuine
circumstances or shall reject if found not satisfactory.
 8.2 Absence during In-Semester Evaluations:
Leave of absence during class test shall be permitted if (a) hospitalized
(ii) death of siblings/ parents/grandparents (iii) deputed by the institute.
Re class test may be arranged for such cases.
9.0
CREDIT TRANSFER
The courses for which credit obtained elsewhere, in Indian or foreign
University/Institutions/ Colleges by students during their study period at GEC may
count towards the credit requirements for the award of degree. Such credit transfer
will be based upon Academic Bank of Credits (ABC).
Since Credits awarded to a student for one programmes from an
institution may be transferred/redeemed by another institution upon the
student’s consent through ABC, it is essential that all students should
get enrolled on ABC, create ABC ID, and share these ABC IDs with
Academic Institutions where they are enrolled. Credits Earned by the
student will reflect in the student’s ABC account. The credits transferred
will reduce the number of courses to be registered by the student at GEC.
The guidelines for such transfer of credits are as follows:
a) Undergraduate students can register up to 40% of the total courses
being offered in a particular programme in a semester through the
Online Learning Courses offered through the SWAYAM/NPTEL
platform and/or other State Level Common Platforms which can be
developed in due course with the participation of different
Universities/ Higher and Technical Education Institutions.
b) Courses which are not covered in (a) may be considered with approval
of GEC academic council.
c) Multi-institutional learning permission: The student shall be allowed
to earn some credits from NEP compliant institutions/colleges other
than the Main/ Parent College i.e. a college where students earn all
their major credits (more than 50%) including credits for the core
subject.
d) Students enrolled in the degree programmes may avail other elective
credits from two different colleges affiliated with the same University
and/or online courses available within the 40% cap mentioned by
UGC.
e) A student must provide all details including the approval or
acceptance letter from the other side. These details will be evaluated
by the concerned departmental academic bodies (BoS) before giving
approval. These academic bodies will then decide the number of
equivalent credits the student will get for such course(s) in GEC
f) A student has to get minimum passing grades/ marks for such
courses for which the credits transfer is to be made.
g) Credits transfers availed by a student shall be properly recorded on
ABC card.
10 WITHDRAWAL FROM THE PROGRAMME
10.1 Temporary Withdrawal
a) A student who has been admitted to a degree programme of the
Institute may be permitted to withdraw temporarily, but its
compulsory condition that candidate shall complete the degree within
8 years from the date of admission to the programme.
i) He/She applies to the Institute stating fully the valid reasons for
withdrawal substantiated with supporting documents and
endorsement from his parent/guardian;
ii) There are no outstanding dues with the Departments /
Institute / Hostels / Library / etc.;
iii) Scholarship holder students are bound by the appropriate
Rules and Regulations of Maharashtra state authorities as
applicable to them.

iv) The decision of the Principal of the Institute regarding
withdrawal of a student is final and binding.
10.2 Permanent Withdrawal:
Any student who withdraws admission before the closing date of admission for
the Academic Session is eligible for the refund of all the fees and deposits,
after a deduction of a processing fee. For the first year admitted student’s
permanent withdrawal is defined as per the norms of admission by
Government of Maharashtra. Once the admission for the year is closed,
the following conditions governs withdrawal of admissions:
a) A student who wants to leave the Institute, will be permitted to do
so (and take Transfer Certificate from the Institute, if needed), only
after clearing all the dues, if any. Also, all the fees and charges
already paid will not be refunded on any account.
b) Those Students who have received any scholarship, stipend or
other forms of assistance from the Institute shall repay all such.
The decision of the Head of Institute/Principal of the Institute
regarding all aspects of withdrawal of a student shall be final and
binding
11.1 Re-entry or Lateral Entry

● Students, opting for exits at any level, will have the option to re-enter
the programme in ODD semesters from where they had left off, in the
same or in a different higher education institution within four years of
exit and complete the degree programme within the stipulated
maximum period of eight years from the date of admission to first year
UG (As per the guidelines issued by Government of Maharashtra from
time to time).
● Re-entry at various levels for lateral entrants in academic programmes
shall be based on the earned and valid credits as deposited and
accumulated in the Academic Bank of Credits (ABC) through Registered
Higher & Technical Education Institutions (RHTEI) and proficiency test
records.
● Lateral entry into the programme of study leading to the UG Diploma/
B. Vocational/ UG Bachelor’s Degree with single minor/ UG Bachelor’s
Degree with Double Minor/ Honor /Research will be based on the
validation of prior learning outcomes achieved and subject to
availability based on intake capacity.

11.2 Multiple Exit

● The multiple exit options with the award of UG certificate/ UG
diploma/or three-year degree depending upon the number of credits
secured. Students will have the flexibility to enter a programme in odd
semesters (as per the guidelines issued by Government of Maharashtra
from time to time) and exit a programme after the successful completion
of even semesters as per their future career needs.
● Students exiting the First-Year programme after securing minimum 44
credits (pass all the FY courses as per progrmme structure) will be
awarded UG Certificate in the relevant Discipline/Subject provided
they secure 8 credits in work-based vocational courses or internship /
Apprenticeship offered during summer vacation in addition to 4 credits
from skill-based courses earned during the first and second semester
as prescribed in the concerned programme structure
● Students exiting the Second Year Programme will be awarded UG
Diploma in the relevant Discipline/Subject provided they pass all the
courses up to second year as prescribed in the concerned programme
structure AND secure additional 8 credits in skill-based vocational
courses (skill-based courses, internship, mini projects etc) offered
during summer vacation after the second year as prescribed in the
concerned programme structure
● Students exiting the 3-year UG program will be awarded B.Voc. in the
relevant Discipline /Subject provided they pass all courses up to third
year as prescribed in the concerned programme structure AND secure
additional 8 credits in skill-based vocational courses (skill-based
courses, internship, mini projects etc.) offered during summer vacation
after the sixth semester as prescribed in the concerned programme
structure
● Exit options shall be provided with Certification, Diploma and B.
Vocational degrees to the students at the end of the second, fourth and
sixth semester, respectively, in the four-year degree programme.
Students will receive a Bachelor’s degree with a single minor on
successfully completing all eight semesters of the UG Programmes
either at a stretch or with opted exits and re-entries.
● In addition to this, student will receive a Bachelor’s degree with Double
Minor/Honor/ Research subject to earning additional credits as
specified in programme structure.
● Eligibility for admission to the UG Bachelor’s Degree with Double
Minor/ Honor /Research as per UGC guidelines: Minimum CGPA of 7.5
after second semester for UG Bachelor’s Degree with Double Minor/
Honor and Minimum CGPA 7.5 after sixth semester for UG Bachelor’s
Degree with Research.
12. CONDUCT AND DISCIPLINE
12.1 Students shall conduct themselves within and outside the premises of
the Institute in a manner befitting the students of a reputed Institution.
12.2 As per the order of Honorable Supreme Court of India, ragging in any
form is considered as a criminal offence and is banned. Any form of
ragging will be severely dealt with.
12.3 The following acts of omission and/or commission shall constitute gross
violation of the code of conduct and are liable to invoke disciplinary
measures:
▪ Ragging.
▪ Lack of courtesy and decorum; indecent behavior anywhere within
or outside the campus.
▪ Willful damage or stealthy removal of any property/belongings of
the Institute/Hostel or of fellow students/citizens.
▪ Possession, consumption or distribution of alcoholic drinks or any
kind of narcotics or hallucinogenic drugs.
▪ Mutilation or unauthorized possession of library books.
▪ Noisy and unseemly behavior, disturbing studies of fellow students.
▪ Hacking in computer systems (such as entering into other person’s
area without prior permission, manipulation and /or damage of
computer hardware and software or any other cybercrime etc.) ▪
Plagiarism of any nature.
▪ Any other act of gross indiscipline as decided by the Academic
Council from time to time.
Commensurate with the gravity of offense, the punishment may be:
reprimand, fine, expulsion from the hostel, debarring from an examination,
disallowing the use of certain facilities of the Institute, rustication for a
specified period or even outright expulsion from the Institute, or even handing
over the case to appropriate law enforcement authorities or the judiciary, as
required by the circumstances.
12.4 For an offence committed in (i) a hostel (ii) a department or in a
classroom and (iii) elsewhere, the Chief Warden, the Head of the
Department and the Dean (Students Activities), respectively, shall have
the authority to reprimand or impose fine.
12.5 Cases of adoption of unfair means and/or any malpractice in an
examination shall be reported to the Controller of Examination for
taking appropriate action.
12.6 All cases of serious offence, possibly requiring punishment other than
reprimand, shall be reported to the Principal.
12.7 The Institute Level Standing Disciplinary Action Committee constituted
by the Principal, shall be the authority to investigate the details of the
offence, and recommend disciplinary action based on the nature and
extent of the offence committed.
12.8 The students are allowed to enter in the campus of Government College
of Engineering Aurangabad(M.S) in “Prescribed Uniform” only. The
students are not allowed to enter in Institute campus with other dress
code which violates the civil society laws.
13 GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONVOCATION:
13.1 A student shall be declared to be eligible for the award of the degree if
he/she has:
(a) Fulfilled Degree Requirements
(b) No dues to the Institute, Departments, Hostels, Library, No disciplinary
action pending against him/her.

13.2 Convocation
It is suggested that Provisional Degree/Degree will be awarded in person for
the students who have graduated during the preceding academic year.
Provisional Degree will be awarded in absentia to such students who are
unable to attend the Convocation. Students are required to apply for the
Convocation along with the prescribed fee, after having satisfactorily
completed all the degree requirements within the specified date in order to
arrange for the award of the degree during convocation.
14 COMMITTEES and FUNCTIONARIES
The following committees shall be constituted common for the various degree
Programs:
14.1 Class/ Course Committee:
Every Class (group of students registered for a course) of the Degree Programme
shall have a Class/ Course Committee, consisting of Faculty and Students.
Constitution:
a) One Faculty of the Teaching Department …Chairman (not associated
(nominated by the Program Coordinator) with the class)
b) Faculty Advisor(s) for the Class … Member Secretary
c) Course Coordinator(s) … Member(s)
d) FOUR to SIX students from the … Members
Class/Course to be chosen by the students
amongst themselves
Functions:
i. The basic responsibilities of the Class/ Course Committees are to review
periodically the progress of the classes, to discuss problems concerning
curriculum and syllabi and the conduct of the classes.
ii. Each class/course committee will communicate its recommendations to the
Programme Coordinator.
iii. There shall be minimum one class committee meeting in the middle of every
semester as indicated in the academic calendar. However additional class
committee meetings may be convened as decided by Course Coordinator.
iv. During beginning of the semester, the Course Coordinators shall present the
method of evaluation and distribution of weightages for the various
components.
v. The minutes of each class/course committee meeting shall be recorded in a
separate minutes register maintained in the Parent/Teaching Department.
14.2 Faculty Advisor(s):
The Faculty Advisor(s) will be appointed by the Programme Coordinator of the
parent department, who will be assigned a specific group (admission-batch) of
students of the concerned parent department and will be valid throughout their
duration of study.
Functions:
i. To help the students in planning their courses and related activities
during their study period.
ii. To monitor, guide, advice and counsel the students on all academic
matters.
iii. To coordinate the activities regarding mandatory learning courses. 
4.3 Course Coordinator:
Functions (Highlights):
i. He /She shall follow all the Regulations related to teaching of a course and
evaluation of students.
ii. He /She shall be responsible for all the records of the students registered for
the course.
iii. He /She shall conduct classes as prescribed in the Academic Calendar and
as per the timetable issued by the department.
iv. He /She will arrange to distribute a course plan and the evaluation plan
together with the course objectives, background materials to all the students
within the first week of each semester.
v. He /She will prepare an evaluation plan showing details of how the student’s
performance will be evaluated in the course.
vi. He /She will properly document the students’ performance and announce to
the students (including on the notice board) as stipulated in the Regulations.
vii. He /She will report to the Programme Coordinator on a periodic (monthly)
basis, the potential cases of very poor academic performance as well as those
of low attendance
ANNEXURE-A
REGULATIONS
SPECIFIC TO
UNDERGRADUATE B. Tech PROGRAMMES
CONTENTS
A1. Degree Programmes
A2. Admission
A3. Course Structure
A4. Degree Requirements
A5. Re-registration
A6. Termination from the Programme
A7. Change of Branch
A8. Committees / Functionaries
REGULATIONS specific to B. Tech Degree Programme
A1. DEGREE PROGRAMS:
A1.1 Under Graduate B. Tech Degree Programmes are offered in the following
disciplines by the respective programme hosting departments listed below:
i. Civil Engineering (CE)
ii. Computer Science & Engineering (CSE)
iii. Electrical Engineering (EE)
iv. Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering (E&TC) v. Information
Technology (IT)
vi. Mechanical Engineering (ME)
 Other teaching departments are:
vii Applied Mechanics (AM) viii Mathematics (MA)
ix Physics (PH), Chemistry (CH)
A1.2 The provisions of these Regulations shall be applicable to any new disciplines
that may be introduced from time to time and appended to the above list.
A2. ADMISSION:
A2.1.1 Admission to GEC, Aurangabad for degree courses will be made in
accordance with the instructions and guidelines received from
Government of Maharashtra and governing authorities from time to time.
A2.1.2 Student Exchange Programs and the Transfer of Credits, shall be as per the
corresponding MOU approved by Competent Authority.
A2.1.3 The Institute reserves the right to cancel the admissions of any student
and ask him to discontinue his studies at any stage on the grounds of
unsatisfactory academic performance or indiscipline or any misconduct.
A2.1.4 The decision of the Academic Council regarding admissions is final and
binding.
A2.1.5 Every Undergraduate student of the Institute shall be associated with
Degree Awarding Department offering the degree programme that the
student undergoes, throughout his study period, right from the very first
day of admission into the programme.
A3. COURSE STRUCTURE:
A3.1 The total course package for a B.Tech. Degree Programme will typically
consist of the following components.
Typical Curriculum Structure for Degree Programs (As per AICTE
Nomenclature)*
Components Total Credits
Basic Science Course BSC 16
Engineering Science Course ESC 14
Programme Core Course (PCC) Program Courses 50
Programme Elective Course (PEC) Program Elective 20
Multidisciplinary Minor (MDM) Multidisciplinary
Courses
14
Open Elective (OEC) Other than a particular
program
Open Elective 08
Vocational and Skill Enhancement Course (VSE) Skill Courses 08
Ability Enhancement Course (AEC) Humanities
Social Science and
Management
(HSSM)
04
Entrepreneurship/Economics/Management
Courses (EEM)
04
Indian Knowledge System (IKS) 02
Value Education Course (VEC) 04
Research Methodology (RMC) Experiential
Learning
Courses
02
Community Engagement Project/Field Project
(CEP)
02
Project (PRJ) 06
Internship/ On Job Training (INT) 12
Co-curricular Courses (CCC) Liberal Learning
Courses
04
Total Credits (Major) 170
*There may be slight variation in Program core and Experiential learning credits for different
programs but total credits will be 170
The Minimum Credit Requirement for the B.TECH. Degree with one minor is 176. Apart
from these students shall opt for one of the following by availing additional credits as
defined in the course structure of the programme:
1. B. Tech with one Multidisciplinary Minor = Total 170
2. B. Tech with one Multidisciplinary Minor (170) and Honor (18) = Total 188
3. B. Tech with one Multidisciplinary Minor (170) and Honor by Research (18) = Total 188
4. B. Tech with two Multidisciplinary Minors (170 +14) = Total 184
Total Credits for the completion of B.Tech. Course with Minor for
Direct Second Year admitted students:
The total number of credits proposed for the B.Tech with 1 Multidisciplinary minor
(Compulsory) degree is 128 as per the structure given below:
Semester III IV V VI VII VIII Total
Credits
Programme Core Course (PCC)
Program
Courses
12+
02*
10 15 11 -- - 50
Programme Elective Course
(PEC)
Program
Elective
-- -- 04 08 08 - 20
Multidisciplinary Minor (MD
M)
Multidisciplinary
Courses
04 03 04 03 14
Open Elective(OE)Other than
a particular program
OE 03 03 02 -- -- -- 08
Vocational and Skill
Enhancement Course
(VSEC)
Skill Courses -- 02 -- 02 -- -- 04
Ability Enhancement Course
(AEC -01, AEC-02)
Humanities
Social Science
and
Management
(HSSM)
-- 02 -- -- -- -- 02
Entrepreneurship/Economics/
Management Courses
02 02 -- -- -- -- 04
Indian Knowledge System
(IKS)
-- -- -- -- -- -
Value Education Course (VEC) 02 02 -- -- -- -- 04
Research Methodology Experiential
Learning
Courses
-- -- -- -- -- 02 02
Comm. Engg. Project
(CEP)/Field Project(FP)
02 -- -- -- -- -- 02
Project -- -- -- -- 02 04 06
Internship/OJT -- -- -- -- -- 12 12
Co-curricular Courses(CC) Liberal Learning
Courses
-- -- -- -- -- - -
Total Credits(Major) 27 24 25 24 10 18 128
Students can opt for any of the following as per the rules and regulations given by institute:
1. B. Tech with one Minor = Total 128 Credits
2. B. Tech with one Minor and Honor = Total 146 Credits
3. B. Tech with one Minor and Honor by Research = Total 146Credits
 4. B. Tech with two Minors = Total 142 Credits
A3.2 Course Allotment
● Compulsory Multidisciplinary Minor Subject
Students shall complete one Minor may be from the different disciplines
of the Engineering faculty, or they can be from different faculty altogether.
These subjects shall be completed from the second year to the final year
of UG Programme.
● Open Elective Courses
Open electives offered by a parent department are courses listed in the
course structure under the open elective category and offered to students.
It is to be chosen compulsorily from faculty other than that of the Major
Discipline.
● Programme Elective Course
The students of a particular programme have to complete the total credits
required under the program elective category by earning the minimum
credits prescribed under the Programme Elective Course (PEC) by
registering for courses listed under the PEC category.
● Skill Courses ○ Vocational and Skill Enhancement Course
Vocational and Skill Enhancement Courses includes courses
giving exposure to Hands on Training corresponding to the Major
and/or Minor Subject.
● Humanities Social Science and Management ○ Ability Enhancement
Course
Courses dealing with English and Modern Indian Language. It is to
be offered from the Basket approved by Institute.
○ Entrepreneurship/Economics/ Management Courses Courses
dealing with above mentioned areas and these courses must be
offered from the Basket approved by Institute.
○ Indian Knowledge System
These are expected to contain basic knowledge of the IKS subject. It
should contain introductory information about the IKS. The student
should be able to acquire basic knowledge after completion of the
course.
○ Value Education Courses
Value Education Courses (VEC) such as Understanding India,
Environmental Science/Education, and Digital and Technological
Solutions or any other similar course.
● Experiential Learning ○ Research Methodology
This course is to be offered to students in either VII or VIII semester.
○ Community Engagement Project/Field Project
These are the courses requiring students to participate in field based
learning/projects generally under the supervision of faculty. The
curricular component of ‘community engagement and service will
involve activities that would expose students to the socioeconomic
issues in society so that the theoretical learnings can be
supplemented by actual life experiences to generate solutions to
real-life problems.26-30 hours of contact time per credit in a
semester along with 13-15 hours of activities such as preparation
for community engagement and service, preparation of reports, etc.,
and independent reading.
○ Project
Project work may consist of Major Project offered by parent
department. The Major Project is a course with 4 credits and can
comprise of Part I and Part II, spread over 1 or 2 semesters of final
year, preferably during VII and VIII semesters.
○ Internship / On-Job Training
Internship corresponding to major course or in a industry wherein
student is placed is of one semester is to be offered in VIII semester.
Courses offered during internship period will be completed in online
mode.
● Co-curricular courses
Students shall complete Liberal learning courses aka co-curriculur
courses such as Health and Wellness, Yoga education sports, and fitness,
Cultural Activities, NSS/NCC and Fine/ Applied/ Visual/Performing Arts
The Department will discuss and recommend the exact credits offered for
the programme for the above components and the semester-wise
distribution among them through programme structure, as well as the
syllabi of all undergraduate courses offered by the department from time
to time before sending the same to the Board of Studies (BoS). The BoS
will consider the proposals from the departments and make
recommendations to the Academic Council for consideration and
approval.
A4. DEGREE REQUIREMENTS
The degree requirements of a student for the B.Tech. programme are as follows:
A4.1 Institute level Credit Requirements
A4.1.1 Minimum Earned Credit Requirement for:
• B. Tech Degree with one Multidisciplinary minor is
176 admitted to first year in the institute
134 credits for direct second year admitted students.
• B. Tech Degree with one Multidisciplinary minor and Honor is
194 admitted to first year in the institute
152 credits for direct second year admitted students.
• B. Tech Degree with one Multidisciplinary minor and Honor by
Research is
194 admitted to first year in the institute
152 credits for direct second year admitted students
• B. Tech Degree with two Multidisciplinary minors is
190 credits admitted to first year in the institute
148 credits for direct second year admitted students
A4.1.2 The minimum time period to offer degree will be four (o4) years
after admission only.
A4.2 Programme Requirements:
A4.2.1 Minimum Earned Credit Requirements on all individual course
categories of the concerned Programme.
A4.2.2 The Maximum duration for a student for complying to the Degree
Requirement is as per NEP 2020/UGC/AICTE/DTE/affiliated
university guidelines.
A5. Re-registration and Admission
A student has a choice to re-register for required courses, under the
following circumstances:
(a) If a student fails to earn the minimum credit specified below:
Check Point Credit Threshold
End of FIRST year 26 credits
End of SECOND year All FY credits + 26 SY credits
End of THIRD year
All FY and SY credits + 26 TY
CREDITS
(b) Students have to earn minimum credits as specified in the above table to
be promoted to higher class.

(c) Students availing admission to the second year have to earn minimum 26
credits of the first year as prescribed in the concerned programme
structure.
(d) Students availing admission to the third year have to pass all the courses
of the first year as prescribed in the concerned programme structure and
have to earn minimum 26 credits from second year specified programme
structure for B. Tech degree with one multidisciplinary minor.
(e) Students availing admission to the final year have to pass all the courses
of the first year and second year as prescribed in the concerned
programme structure and have to earn 26 credits from third year specified
programme structure for B. Tech degree with one multidisciplinary minor.
A6. TERMINATION FROM THE PROGRAMME:
a. If a student is absent for more than 8 (Eight) weeks at a stretch in a semester
without sanctioned leave.
b. Based on disciplinary action suggested by the Academic Council, on the
recommendation of the appropriate committee.
c. Student will be terminated from the program as per UGC/University rules and
regulation
A7. CHANGE OF BRANCH:
Change of branch will be allowed as per rules and regulations for change of
branch published by Government of Maharashtra from time to time.
A8. COMMITTEES / FUNCTIONARIES:
The following committees shall be constituted specifically for the Under
Graduate (B.E.) degree programme:
A8.1 Board of Studies (BoS-UG):
Constitution: as per UGC/AICTE Guidelines for autonomous institutes.
A8.2 Departmental Faculty Board (DFB)
Constitution:
Programme Co-ordinator …Chairman
All faculty members … Members
Note:
▪ There shall be one DFB for every department that is involved in the
teaching for the B.E. degree programme.
▪ The Secretary (DFB) shall be nominated by the Chairman on rotation
basis for a period of one year from faculties.
▪ The Chairman may co-opt and/or invite more members including at
most three outside experts.
▪ The quorum for each meeting shall be five.
Functions:
i. To monitor the conduct of all undergraduate courses of the department.
ii. To ensure academic standard and excellence of the courses offered by the
department.
iii. To develop/revise the curriculum for undergraduate courses offered by the
department and recommend the same to the BoS.
iv. Moderation (only if and when found necessary) in consultation with the
Course Co-coordinator, and approval of the finalized grades, before
submission to CoE
v. To consolidate the registration of the student and communicate to Course
Co-coordinators, and also to the Dean (Academic).
vi. To conduct performance appraisal of Course coordinators.
vii. To provide feedback of the performance appraisal to the Course Coordinator
and concerned authorities.
viii. To consider any matter related to the undergraduate programme of the
department.
ix. In cases where a course is taught by more than one faculty member, or by
different faculty members for different sections of students, shall coordinate
(only in case of need) among all such faculty members regarding the teaching
and evaluation of such courses.
x. To conduct at least two meetings each semester and send the Resolutions of
the meeting to the Board of Studies and also to maintain a record of the same
in the department.
xi. Any appropriate responsibility or function assigned by the Academic Council
or the Chairman of the Academic Council or the BoS or the Chairman of the
BoS.
COURSE STRUCTURE - UG
CONTENTS
Course Numbering Scheme
Department Course Category Level Revision Course Number
For Minor 1 courses
Department Course Category Level - Revision Course Number
Minor 1
Level for Minor 1 -- 5 (MDM)
Level for Minor 2 -- 6 (MDM)
Level for Honor -- 7 (HNC)
Level for Research -- 8 (RPR)
Departments
Sr.
No.
Name of Department Code
1 Civil Engineering CE
2 Computer Science and Engineering CS
3 Electrical Engineering EE
4 Electronics & Telecommunication Engineering ET
5 Information Technology IT
6 Mechanical Engineering ME
7 Applied Mechanics AM
8 Mathematics MA
9 Physics PH
10 Chemistry CH
11 Institute (Courses which does not belong to any particular department) IN
E E P C C 1 0 0 1
E E M D M 5 0 0 1
Course Category
Sr.
No.
Description Code
1 Basic Science Courses BSC
2 Engineering Science Courses ESC
3 Programme Core Courses PCC
4 Programme Elective Courses PEC
5 Multidisciplinary Minor Courses MDM
6 Open Elective Courses OEC
7 Vocational and Skill Enhancement Courses VSE
8 Humanity, Social Science & Management (HSSM)
Ability Enhancement Courses AEC
Entrepreneurship/Economics/ Management EEM
Indian Knowledge System IKS
Value Education Courses VEC
 9 Experiential Learning
Research Methodology Courses RMC
Community Engagement Project /Field Project CEP
Project PRJ
Internship / OJT INT
 10 Co-curricular Courses CCC
 11 Honor courses HNC
 12 Research courses RPR
For Open Elective & Humanity, Social Science & Management Courses, level will be ‘0’ for Odd
term & ‘1’ for Even term
For OES/HS I, Course code number will be from 10 to 19, for OE/HS II, 20 to 29, for OE/HS III
30-39 and so on.
Level 1 : First year, Level 2: Second Year, Level 3: Third Year, Level 4: Fourth Year Revision
indicates updation in course. Initially it will start with zero
 Level for Minor 1 - 5 (MDM), Level for Minor 2 - 6 (MDM)
Level for Hon - 7 (HNC), Level for Research - 8 (RPR)
Description
For e.g. for specifying
1. Course code of physics at first year PHBSC10XX
2. Course code for final year Program Elective of Electrical Engineering
Department
EEPEC40XX
3. Course code for Open Elective Course I offered in ODD term by
Computer Department
CSOEC00XX
4. Course code for Engineering Exploration by Electronics Department ETVSE10XX
5. Course code for Communication Skill INAEC10XX
6. Minor course of CSE opted by ETX student CSMDM50XX 