RULES AND REGULATIONS
NEP COMPLIANT CURRICULUM
FOR
UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMME
Bachelor of Technology
w.e.f. 2023-2024
Revised & approved in 28th Academic Council Meeting held on 25h June 2024
 GOVERNMENT COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AURANGABAD
 (An Autonomous Institute of Govt. of Maharashtra)
 Station Road, Osmanpura, Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar Aurangabad- 431005 (M.S.)
 +91-240- 2366101, 2366111
CONTENTS
1. Introduction
2. Definitions
3. Academic Calendar
4. Registration
5. Credit & Evaluation System
6. Add / Drop
7. Attendance Requirements
8. Absence during the Semester
9. Credit Transfer
10. Withdrawal from the Programme
11. Multiple Exit and Entry Path
12. Conduct and Discipline
13. Graduation Requirements & Convocation
14. Committees and Functionaries
15. Annexure A

The General Regulations are in force for the students taking admission for the
first year in engineering from the year 2023-2024 and Onwards for a full-time
undergraduate course.
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The General Regulations that are common to all Degree Programmes of
Government College of Engineering, Aurangabad are presented here.
Specific aspects of the Regulations pertaining to a particular Degree
Programme are given separately along with the corresponding Curriculum.
1.2 The provisions contained in this set of Regulations govern the policies and
procedures, on the admission of students, imparting instructions of courses,
conducting of the examinations, and evaluation and certification of students,
performance leading to the said Degree Program(s).
1.3 This set of Regulations shall be binding on all students undergoing the said
Degree Program(s) of Government College of Engineering, Aurangabad.
1.4 This set of Regulations may evolve and get revised/refined or updated or
amended or modified or changed through appropriate approvals from the
Academic Council, from time to time, and shall be binding on all parties
concerned, including the Students, Faculty, Staff, Departments, Institute
Authorities.
1.5 In order to guarantee fairness and justice to all the parties concerned, in view
of the periodic evolutionary refinements, any specific issues or matters of
concern shall be addressed to the Academic Council, as and when found
necessary through appropriate authorities.
1.6 The Academic Council may consider any issues or matters of concern relating
to any or all the Academic activities of the Institute, for appropriate action,
irrespective of whether a reference is made (or the nature and extent of any
reference if so present) herein this set of Regulations or otherwise.
1.7 All disputes arising from this set of Regulations must be addressed to the
Academic Council. The decision of the Academic Council is final and binding
on all parties concerned. Further, any legal disputes arising from this set of
Regulations shall be limited to the legal jurisdiction Aurangabad and not that
of any other parties.
2.0 DEFINITIONS: Unless the context otherwise requires –
• “Academic Council” means, Academic Council of the Institute
• “ABC” means, Academic Bank of Credit
• “BoG” means, the Board of Governance of the Institute
• “BoS” means, the Board of Studies of the department
• “Course” means, a specific subject usually identified by its course-code and
course-title, with a specified syllabus/course
-description, a set of references, taught by some
teacher(s)/course-Coordinator(s) to a specific class (group of students)
during a specific academic-session/semester
• “Course coordinator” means, a teacher who teaches and/or coordinates
various activities of a Course
• “Curriculum” includes the set of Academic Regulations, Course Structure,
and Course-Contents
• “CET” means, Common Entrance Test conducted by competent
Authority
• “Dean (Acad)” means, the Dean (Academics)
• “Dean (SA)” means, the Dean (Student Activities)
• “Dean (R&D)” means, the Dean (Research & Development)
• “Reg Acad” means Registrar Academics
• “Faculty Advisor” means the Faculty Advisor or the Panel of Faculty
Advisors, in a Parent Department, for a group (admission-batch) of students
• “GATE” means, Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering
• “HoD” means the Head of the Department.
• “Institute”/“GEC” means, Government College of Engineering,
Aurangabad
• “NEP” means, National Education Policy 2020
• “Principal” means the Head of the Institute.
• “Programme Coordinator” means, a faculty in charge of an academic
programme
• “Parent Department” means, the department that offers the degree
programme that a student undergoes
• “ISE” means In semester Evaluation
• “ESE” means End Semester examination
ACADEMIC CALENDAR
3.1 The normal duration of the course leading to B. TECH. degree will be
EIGHT semesters.
3.2 Each academic year shall be divided into 2 semesters, each of a
minimum 90 working days duration (including Examinations duration).
3.3 The schedule of academic activities for a Semester, including the dates of
registration, In-semester evaluations, end-semester examination, re examination, intersemester vacation, etc. shall be referred to as the Academic Calendar of the Semester,
which shall be prepared by the Dean (Academic), approved by the Academic Council,
and announced at least TWO weeks before the Closing Date of the previous Semester.
3.4 The Academic Calendar must be adhered to, and all other activities including cocurricular and/or extra-curricular activities must be scheduled so as not to interfere
with the Curricular Activities as stipulated in the Academic Calendar.
3.5 Under any circumstances when any of the Teaching Days gets declared as a Holiday
or otherwise when the classes get suspended, irrespective of whatsoever be the reasons,
appropriate makeup for such loss shall be made by Programme Coordinator having the
class/lab/teaching sessions conducted on a suitable day by following the particular
Class Time-table of that Teaching Day which was so lost.
4.0 REGISTRATION
4.1 Every Student after consulting his/her Faculty-Advisor is required to register
for the approved courses of Parent Department before commencement of each
semester on the days fixed for such registration and notified in the academic
calendar. Programme coordinator will monitor and appoint Departmental
Committees in order to properly facilitate course registration. All students must
personally be present on these dates. Minimum fifteen 15 students are required for
starting a course in a UG programme. Maximum seventy (70) students can register
for any Elective Courses like Multidisciplinary Minor Courses, Honor Courses, Open
Electives per division. Head of the Institute is final authority to decide maximum
and minimum count of students per division for a course as circumstances exist.
4.2 Mandatory Pre-Registration for higher semesters:
 In order to facilitate proper planning of the academic activities of a semester, it is
essential for the student to declare their intent to register for an elective course/s well
in advance, before the actual start of the academic session, through the process of Pre-
Registration, which is mandatory for all students of second or higher semesters. The
span of pre-registration shall be declared on website and academic calendar.
4.3 All students (other than the freshly admitted students) intending to register for the
next higher semester are required to have complete the Mandatory Pre-Registration of
elective courses, at least TWO weeks before the last day of instruction specified in the
academic calendar of the current semester. To facilitate this Pre-registration, all
departments shall announce the list of courses to be offered for the next higher
semester, at least FOUR weeks before the Last Day of instruction specified in the
academic calendar of the current semester.
4.4 Students who do not register on the day announced for the purpose, may be
permitted LATE REGISTRATION by Head of Department up to the notified day in
academic calendar on payment of late fee.
4.5 REGISTRATION IN ABSENTIA will be allowed only in exceptional cases through the
authorized representatives of the student with the approval of programme coordinator/
HoD.
4.6 A student will be permitted to register in the next semester only if
he/she fulfills the following conditions:
i. Satisfies all the Academic Requirements to continue with the
programme of Studies
ii. Cleared all Institute, Hostel and Library dues and fines (if any) of the
previous semesters
iii. Paid all required advance payments of the Institute and hostel for the
current semester
iv. Not been debarred from registering on any specific ground by the
Institute.
5.0 CREDIT & EVALUATION SYSTEM
(The Grading System)
5.1 The grading system for Undergraduate Programmes as proposed by Dean
(Academics), recommended by the examination committee & approved by the
Academic council shall be followed for declaration of results. For every course taken
by a student, he/she is assigned a grade based on his/her combined performance
in all the heads of assessments. The grade indicates a qualitative assessment of
the student’s performance and is associated with an equivalent number called a
grade point.
5.2 The academic performance shall be graded on a ten-grade point scale following
guidelines given below for undergraduate classes.
5.3 The letter Grades (up to D only) awarded to a student in all the
courses shall be converted into a semester and cumulative performance
index called the Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) and Cumulative
Grade Point Average (CGPA).
5.4 RELATIVE GRADE SYSTEM FOR UG PROGRAM
Award of Grades-
 5.4.1 Grade A++ absolute grade to be awarded to 10 % or less number of
students securing more than 80 % marks.
 5.4.2 In the case of students appearing for Re-examination the grade
shall not be higher than A+ in that particular course.
 5.4.3 Grade D absolute grade to be awarded to a student who fails to
pass the subject securing less than 40 % marks or student
remaining ABSENT in a course of End Semester Examination/Re-Examination.
 5.4.4 The intermediate grade shall be divided on equal scale between a
student securing A++ and C grade.
5.4.5 There shall be letter grades with associated grade points as given
below:
Relative Range of
Marks
Grade Grade
Point
M > k1 A++ 10.0
k1>M ≥ k2 A+ 9.0
k2>M ≥ k3 A 8.0
k3>M ≥ k4 B+ 7.0
k4>M ≥ k5 B 6.0
k5>M ≥ k6 C+ 5.0
k6>M ≥ k7 C 4.0
M< k7 D 0
Detained D1 0
Drop D2 0
Withdrawn D3 0
Where,
M- marks obtained out of 100, k1 = Minimum marks of
(A++-1) or maximum marks secured if no student is awarded
A++, k7=40; C= abs (k1-k7)/6; k2= (k1-C); k3=k2-C; k4=k3 C; k5=k4-
C; k6=k5-C
5.4.6 The SGPA and CGPA shall be calculated as per the procedure
followed based on credits. The equivalent percentage from CGPA shall be
calculated as (CGPA) X 10.
5.4.7 Class is awarded on the basis of CGPA First Division with
Distinction = CGPA ≥ 7.00
First Division = 7.00 > CGPA ≥ 6.00
Second Division = 6.00 > CGPA ≥ 5.00
Pass Class = CGPA < 5.00
5.5 Evaluation System
5.5.1 Marking Scheme for theory courses will be as follows:
Sr.
No
Theory/
Practical
course
No of
credits
ISE I ISE II ISE
III
ESE Total
1 Theory 3/4 15 15 10 60 100
2 2 10 10 30 50
3 Practical 1/2 25/50 25/50/
(optional)
5.5.2 Exam Duration
Sr.
No
Marks for the
exam
Duration
1 ISE – 15 marks One Hour
2 ISE – 10 marks 45 minutes
3 ESE – 30 marks 1 Hr 30 minutes
4 ESE – 60 marks 2 Hrs 30 minutes
5.5.3 Passing criteria
Students shall pass a theory course if the total number of marks scored in
ISE I, ISE II, ISE III and ESE is greater than or equal to 40%.
Students shall pass a practical course provided the scoring is greater than or
equal to 40% separately for a Term work (ISE III normally) and Practical exam
(ESE).
6.0 ADD / DROP
6.1 ADD-option:
A student has the option to ADD courses for registration till
the date specified for late registration in the Academic Calendar.
6.2 DROP-option:
 On recommendation of the Teaching Department as well as the Parent
Department, a student has the option to DROP courses from registration until 2
weeks after the commencement of the classes in the semester, as indicated
in the Academic
Calendar.
7.0
ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS
7.1 All students must attend every lecture, tutorial and practical
class in an Offline/Online mode as the case may be.
7.2 To account for approved leave of absence (e.g. representing the
Institute in sports, games or athletics; placement activities; NCC/NSS
activities; etc.) and/or any other such contingencies like medical
emergencies, etc., the attendance requirement shall be a minimum of
75% of the classes actually conducted.
7.3 A student with less than 75% attendance and/or unsatisfactory
participation/performance in ISE evaluation in a course during a
semester, in all the academic activities will not be permitted to appear in
the ESE of the course in which the deficiency of attendance exists,
irrespective of his academic performance, and irrespective of nature of his
absence. The student will have to re register in the same course as and
when offered in the institute or he/she may have a choice to register in
an equivalent course as approved by the respective board of studies.
Absence due to illness or any other valid and genuine reason/s for a
period less than two weeks in a semester to which a student could not
make a prior application may be condoned by Head of Institute after
proper verification. 
7.4 The course coordinator shall communicate periodically the
attendance of the concerned students and shall publish list of
provisionally detained students with the reason thereof at least one week
before the last day of instruction in the current semester.
7.5 Students who do not satisfy the criteria for final grant of term shall
be finally detained by the course coordinator on the last day of instruction
and shall be communicated in writing to the concerned students, program
coordinator and controller of examination
7.6 The attendance records are to be maintained by the course
coordinator and he/she shall show it to the student, if and when required
and to be published on website.
8.0
ABSENCE DURING THE SEMESTER
8.1 Leave of Absence:
a) The leave of absence for the student for valid and genuine reasons
shall be required to be approved by faculty advisor and the programme
coordinator at appropriate time with supporting documents.
b) The faculty advisor/programme coordinator may on receipt of
such request in writing shall grant leave under genuine
circumstances or shall reject if found not satisfactory.
 8.2 Absence during In-Semester Evaluations:
Leave of absence during class test shall be permitted if (a) hospitalized
(ii) death of siblings/ parents/grandparents (iii) deputed by the institute.
Re class test may be arranged for such cases.
9.0
CREDIT TRANSFER
The courses for which credit obtained elsewhere, in Indian or foreign
University/Institutions/ Colleges by students during their study period at GEC may
count towards the credit requirements for the award of degree. Such credit transfer
will be based upon Academic Bank of Credits (ABC).
Since Credits awarded to a student for one programmes from an
institution may be transferred/redeemed by another institution upon the
student’s consent through ABC, it is essential that all students should
get enrolled on ABC, create ABC ID, and share these ABC IDs with
Academic Institutions where they are enrolled. Credits Earned by the
student will reflect in the student’s ABC account. The credits transferred
will reduce the number of courses to be registered by the student at GEC.
The guidelines for such transfer of credits are as follows:
a) Undergraduate students can register up to 40% of the total courses
being offered in a particular programme in a semester through the
Online Learning Courses offered through the SWAYAM/NPTEL
platform and/or other State Level Common Platforms which can be
developed in due course with the participation of different
Universities/ Higher and Technical Education Institutions.
b) Courses which are not covered in (a) may be considered with approval
of GEC academic council.
c) Multi-institutional learning permission: The student shall be allowed
to earn some credits from NEP compliant institutions/colleges other
than the Main/ Parent College i.e. a college where students earn all
their major credits (more than 50%) including credits for the core
subject.
d) Students enrolled in the degree programmes may avail other elective
credits from two different colleges affiliated with the same University
and/or online courses available within the 40% cap mentioned by
UGC.
e) A student must provide all details including the approval or
acceptance letter from the other side. These details will be evaluated
by the concerned departmental academic bodies (BoS) before giving
approval. These academic bodies will then decide the number of
equivalent credits the student will get for such course(s) in GEC
f) A student has to get minimum passing grades/ marks for such
courses for which the credits transfer is to be made.
g) Credits transfers availed by a student shall be properly recorded on
ABC card.
10 WITHDRAWAL FROM THE PROGRAMME
10.1 Temporary Withdrawal
a) A student who has been admitted to a degree programme of the
Institute may be permitted to withdraw temporarily, but its
compulsory condition that candidate shall complete the degree within
8 years from the date of admission to the programme.
i) He/She applies to the Institute stating fully the valid reasons for
withdrawal substantiated with supporting documents and
endorsement from his parent/guardian;
ii) There are no outstanding dues with the Departments /
Institute / Hostels / Library / etc.;
iii) Scholarship holder students are bound by the appropriate
Rules and Regulations of Maharashtra state authorities as
applicable to them.

iv) The decision of the Principal of the Institute regarding
withdrawal of a student is final and binding.
10.2 Permanent Withdrawal:
Any student who withdraws admission before the closing date of admission for
the Academic Session is eligible for the refund of all the fees and deposits,
after a deduction of a processing fee. For the first year admitted student’s
permanent withdrawal is defined as per the norms of admission by
Government of Maharashtra. Once the admission for the year is closed,
the following conditions governs withdrawal of admissions:
a) A student who wants to leave the Institute, will be permitted to do
so (and take Transfer Certificate from the Institute, if needed), only
after clearing all the dues, if any. Also, all the fees and charges
already paid will not be refunded on any account.
b) Those Students who have received any scholarship, stipend or
other forms of assistance from the Institute shall repay all such.
The decision of the Head of Institute/Principal of the Institute
regarding all aspects of withdrawal of a student shall be final and
binding
11.1 Re-entry or Lateral Entry

● Students, opting for exits at any level, will have the option to re-enter
the programme in ODD semesters from where they had left off, in the
same or in a different higher education institution within four years of
exit and complete the degree programme within the stipulated
maximum period of eight years from the date of admission to first year
UG (As per the guidelines issued by Government of Maharashtra from
time to time).
● Re-entry at various levels for lateral entrants in academic programmes
shall be based on the earned and valid credits as deposited and
accumulated in the Academic Bank of Credits (ABC) through Registered
Higher & Technical Education Institutions (RHTEI) and proficiency test
records.
● Lateral entry 